.rn '' }`
'''
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH des_modes 7 "0.9.5a" "22/Jul/2000" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
Modes of DES \- the variants of DES and other crypto algorithms of OpenSSL
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Several crypto algorithms fo OpenSSL can be used in a number of modes.  Those
are used for using block ciphers in a way similar to stream ciphers, among
other things.
.SH "OVERVIEW"
.Sh "Electronic Codebook Mode (\s-1ECB\s0)"
Normally, this is found as the function \fIalgorithm\fR\fI_ecb_encrypt()\fR.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
64 bits are enciphered at a time.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The order of the blocks can be rearranged without detection.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The same plaintext block always produces the same ciphertext block
(for the same key) making it vulnerable to a \*(L'dictionary attack\*(R'.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
An error will only affect one ciphertext block.
.Sh "Cipher Block Chaining Mode (\s-1CBC\s0)"
Normally, this is found as the function \fIalgorithm\fR\fI_cbc_encrypt()\fR.
Be aware that \fIdes_cbc_encrypt()\fR is not really \s-1DES\s0 \s-1CBC\s0 (it does
not update the \s-1IV\s0); use \fIdes_ncbc_encrypt()\fR instead.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
a multiple of 64 bits are enciphered at a time.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The \s-1CBC\s0 mode produces the same ciphertext whenever the same
plaintext is encrypted using the same key and starting variable.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The chaining operation makes the ciphertext blocks dependent on the
current and all preceding plaintext blocks and therefore blocks can not
be rearranged.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The use of different starting variables prevents the same plaintext
enciphering to the same ciphertext.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
An error will affect the current and the following ciphertext blocks.
.Sh "Cipher Feedback Mode (\s-1CFB\s0)"
Normally, this is found as the function \fIalgorithm\fR\fI_cfb_encrypt()\fR.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
a number of bits (j) <= 64 are enciphered at a time.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The \s-1CFB\s0 mode produces the same ciphertext whenever the same
plaintext is encrypted using the same key and starting variable.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The chaining operation makes the ciphertext variables dependent on the
current and all preceding variables and therefore j-bit variables are
chained together and can not be rearranged.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The use of different starting variables prevents the same plaintext
enciphering to the same ciphertext.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The strength of the \s-1CFB\s0 mode depends on the size of k (maximal if
j == k).  In my implementation this is always the case.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
Selection of a small value for j will require more cycles through
the encipherment algorithm per unit of plaintext and thus cause
greater processing overheads.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
Only multiples of j bits can be enciphered.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
An error will affect the current and the following ciphertext variables.
.Sh "Output Feedback Mode (\s-1OFB\s0)"
Normally, this is found as the function \fIalgorithm\fR\fI_ofb_encrypt()\fR.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
a number of bits (j) <= 64 are enciphered at a time.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The \s-1OFB\s0 mode produces the same ciphertext whenever the same
plaintext enciphered using the same key and starting variable.  More
over, in the \s-1OFB\s0 mode the same key stream is produced when the same
key and start variable are used.  Consequently, for security reasons
a specific start variable should be used only once for a given key.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The absence of chaining makes the \s-1OFB\s0 more vulnerable to specific attacks.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
The use of different start variables values prevents the same
plaintext enciphering to the same ciphertext, by producing different
key streams.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
Selection of a small value for j will require more cycles through
the encipherment algorithm per unit of plaintext and thus cause
greater processing overheads.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
Only multiples of j bits can be enciphered.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
\s-1OFB\s0 mode of operation does not extend ciphertext errors in the
resultant plaintext output.  Every bit error in the ciphertext causes
only one bit to be in error in the deciphered plaintext.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
\s-1OFB\s0 mode is not self-synchronising.  If the two operation of
encipherment and decipherment get out of synchronism, the system needs
to be re-initialised.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
Each re-initialisation should use a value of the start variable
different from the start variable values used before with the same
key.  The reason for this is that an identical bit stream would be
produced each time from the same parameters.  This would be
susceptible to a \*(L'known plaintext\*(R' attack.
.Sh "Triple \s-1ECB\s0 Mode"
Normally, this is found as the function \fIalgorithm\fR\fI_ecb3_encrypt()\fR.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
Encrypt with key1, decrypt with key2 and encrypt with key3 again.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
As for \s-1ECB\s0 encryption but increases the key length to 168 bits.
There are theoretic attacks that can be used that make the effective
key length 112 bits, but this attack also requires 2^56 blocks of
memory, not very likely, even for the \s-1NSA\s0.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
If both keys are the same it is equivalent to encrypting once with
just one key.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
If the first and last key are the same, the key length is 112 bits.
There are attacks that could reduce the key space to 55 bit's but it
requires 2^56 blocks of memory.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
If all 3 keys are the same, this is effectively the same as normal
ecb mode.
.Sh "Triple \s-1CBC\s0 Mode"
Normally, this is found as the function \fIalgorithm\fR\fI_ede3_cbc_encrypt()\fR.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
Encrypt with key1, decrypt with key2 and then encrypt with key3.
.Ip "\(bu" 2
As for \s-1CBC\s0 encryption but increases the key length to 168 bits with
the same restrictions as for triple ecb mode.
.SH "NOTES"
This text was been written in large parts by Eric Young in his original
documentation for SSLeay, the predecessor of OpenSSL.  In turn, he attributed
it to:
.PP
.Vb 5
\&        AS 2805.5.2
\&        Australian Standard
\&        Electronic funds transfer - Requirements for interfaces,
\&        Part 5.2: Modes of operation for an n-bit block cipher algorithm
\&        Appendix A
.Ve
.SH "SEE ALSO"
the \fIblowfish(3)|blowfish(3)\fR manpage, the \fIdes(3)|des(3)\fR manpage, the \fIidea(3)|idea(3)\fR manpage,
the \fIrc2(3)|rc2(3)\fR manpage

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "des_modes 7"
.IX Name "Modes of DES - the variants of DES and other crypto algorithms of OpenSSL"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "OVERVIEW"

.IX Subsection "Electronic Codebook Mode (\s-1ECB\s0)"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Subsection "Cipher Block Chaining Mode (\s-1CBC\s0)"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Subsection "Cipher Feedback Mode (\s-1CFB\s0)"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Subsection "Output Feedback Mode (\s-1OFB\s0)"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Subsection "Triple \s-1ECB\s0 Mode"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Subsection "Triple \s-1CBC\s0 Mode"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

