.rn '' }`
'''
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH DSA 1 "0.9.5a" "22/Jul/2000" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
dsa \- DSA key processing
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBopenssl\fR \fBdsa\fR
[\fB\-inform PEM|DER\fR]
[\fB\-outform PEM|DER\fR]
[\fB\-in filename\fR]
[\fB\-passin arg\fR]
[\fB\-out filename\fR]
[\fB\-passout arg\fR]
[\fB\-des\fR]
[\fB\-des3\fR]
[\fB\-idea\fR]
[\fB\-text\fR]
[\fB\-noout\fR]
[\fB\-modulus\fR]
[\fB\-pubin\fR]
[\fB\-pubout\fR]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The \fBdsa\fR command processes DSA keys. They can be converted between various
forms and their components printed out. \fBNote\fR This command uses the
traditional SSLeay compatible format for private key encryption: newer
applications should use the more secure PKCS#8 format using the \fBpkcs8\fR
.SH "COMMAND OPTIONS"
.Ip "\fB\-inform \s-1DER\s0|\s-1PEM\s0\fR" 4
This specifies the input format. The \fB\s-1DER\s0\fR option with a private key uses
an \s-1ASN1\s0 \s-1DER\s0 encoded form of an \s-1ASN\s0.1 \s-1SEQUENCE\s0 consisting of the values of
version (currently zero), p, q, g, the public and private key components
respectively as \s-1ASN\s0.1 INTEGERs. When used with a public key it uses a
SubjectPublicKeyInfo structure: it is an error if the key is not \s-1DSA\s0.
.Sp
The \fB\s-1PEM\s0\fR form is the default format: it consists of the \fB\s-1DER\s0\fR format base64
encoded with additional header and footer lines. In the case of a private key
\s-1PKCS\s0#8 format is also accepted.
.Ip "\fB\-outform \s-1DER\s0|\s-1PEM\s0\fR" 4
This specifies the output format, the options have the same meaning as the 
\fB\-inform\fR option.
.Ip "\fB\-in filename\fR" 4
This specifies the input filename to read a key from or standard input if this
option is not specified. If the key is encrypted a pass phrase will be
prompted for.
.Ip "\fB\-passin arg\fR" 4
the input file password source. For more information about the format of \fBarg\fR
see the \fB\s-1PASS\s0 \s-1PHRASE\s0 \s-1ARGUMENTS\s0\fR section in the \fIopenssl(1)|openssl(1)\fR manpage.
.Ip "\fB\-out filename\fR" 4
This specifies the output filename to write a key to or standard output by
is not specified. If any encryption options are set then a pass phrase will be
prompted for. The output filename should \fBnot\fR be the same as the input
filename.
.Ip "\fB\-passout arg\fR" 4
the output file password source. For more information about the format of \fBarg\fR
see the \fB\s-1PASS\s0 \s-1PHRASE\s0 \s-1ARGUMENTS\s0\fR section in the \fIopenssl(1)|openssl(1)\fR manpage.
.Ip "\fB\-des|\-des3|\-idea\fR" 4
These options encrypt the private key with the \s-1DES\s0, triple \s-1DES\s0, or the 
\s-1IDEA\s0 ciphers respectively before outputting it. A pass phrase is prompted for.
If none of these options is specified the key is written in plain text. This
means that using the \fBdsa\fR utility to read in an encrypted key with no
encryption option can be used to remove the pass phrase from a key, or by
setting the encryption options it can be use to add or change the pass phrase.
These options can only be used with \s-1PEM\s0 format output files.
.Ip "\fB\-text\fR" 4
prints out the public, private key components and parameters.
.Ip "\fB\-noout\fR" 4
this option prevents output of the encoded version of the key.
.Ip "\fB\-modulus\fR" 4
this option prints out the value of the public key component of the key.
.Ip "\fB\-pubin\fR" 4
by default a private key is read from the input file: with this option a
public key is read instead.
.Ip "\fB\-pubout\fR" 4
by default a private key is output. With this option a public
key will be output instead. This option is automatically set if the input is
a public key.
.SH "NOTES"
The PEM private key format uses the header and footer lines:
.PP
.Vb 2
\& -----BEGIN DSA PRIVATE KEY-----
\& -----END DSA PRIVATE KEY-----
.Ve
The PEM public key format uses the header and footer lines:
.PP
.Vb 2
\& -----BEGIN PUBLIC KEY-----
\& -----END PUBLIC KEY-----
.Ve
.SH "EXAMPLES"
To remove the pass phrase on a DSA private key:
.PP
.Vb 1
\& openssl dsa -in key.pem -out keyout.pem
.Ve
To encrypt a private key using triple DES:
.PP
.Vb 1
\& openssl dsa -in key.pem -des3 -out keyout.pem
.Ve
To convert a private key from PEM to DER format: 
.PP
.Vb 1
\& openssl dsa -in key.pem -outform DER -out keyout.der
.Ve
To print out the components of a private key to standard output:
.PP
.Vb 1
\& openssl dsa -in key.pem -text -noout
.Ve
To just output the public part of a private key:
.PP
.Vb 1
\& openssl dsa -in key.pem -pubout -out pubkey.pem
.Ve
.SH "SEE ALSO"
the \fIdsaparam(1)|dsaparam(1)\fR manpage, the \fIgendsa(1)|gendsa(1)\fR manpage, the \fIrsa(1)|rsa(1)\fR manpage,
the \fIgenrsa(1)|genrsa(1)\fR manpage

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "DSA 1"
.IX Name "dsa - DSA key processing"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "COMMAND OPTIONS"

.IX Item "\fB\-inform \s-1DER\s0|\s-1PEM\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-outform \s-1DER\s0|\s-1PEM\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-in filename\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-passin arg\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-out filename\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-passout arg\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-des|\-des3|\-idea\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-text\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-noout\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-modulus\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-pubin\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-pubout\fR"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Header "EXAMPLES"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

