.rn '' }`
'''
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH VERIFY 1 "0.9.5a" "22/Jul/2000" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
pkcs7 \- PKCS#7 utility
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBopenssl\fR \fBverify\fR
[\fB\-CApath directory\fR]
[\fB\-CAfile file\fR]
[\fB\-purpose purpose\fR]
[\fB\-untrusted file\fR]
[\fB\-help\fR]
[\fB\-verbose\fR]
[\fB\-\fR]
[certificates]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The \fBverify\fR command verifies certificate chains.
.SH "COMMAND OPTIONS"
.Ip "\fB\-CApath directory\fR" 4
A directory of trusted certificates. The certificates should have names
of the form: hash.0 or have symbolic links to them of this
form ("hash\*(R" is the hashed certificate subject name: see the \fB\-hash\fR option
of the \fBx509\fR utility). Under Unix the \fBc_rehash\fR script will automatically
create symbolic links to a directory of certificates.
.Ip "\fB\-CAfile file\fR" 4
A file of trusted certificates. The file should contain multiple certificates
in \s-1PEM\s0 format concatenated together.
.Ip "\fB\-untrusted file\fR" 4
A file of untrusted certificates. The file should contain multiple certificates
.Ip "\fB\-purpose purpose\fR" 4
the intended use for the certificate. Without this option no chain verification
will be done. Currently accepted uses are \fBsslclient\fR, \fBsslserver\fR,
\fBnssslserver\fR, \fBsmimesign\fR, \fBsmimeencrypt\fR. See the \fB\s-1VERIFY\s0 \s-1OPERATION\s0\fR
section for more information.
.Ip "\fB\-help\fR" 4
prints out a usage message.
.Ip "\fB\-verbose\fR" 4
print extra information about the operations being performed.
.Ip "\fB\-\fR" 4
marks the last option. All arguments following this are assumed to be
certificate files. This is useful if the first certificate filename begins
with a \fB\-\fR.
.Ip "\fBcertificates\fR" 4
one or more certificates to verify. If no certificate filenames are included
then an attempt is made to read a certificate from standard input. They should
all be in \s-1PEM\s0 format.
.SH "VERIFY OPERATION"
The \fBverify\fR program uses the same functions as the internal SSL and S/MIME
verification, therefore this description applies to these verify operations
too.
.PP
There is one crucial difference between the verify operations performed
by the \fBverify\fR program: wherever possible an attempt is made to continue
after an error whereas normally the verify operation would halt on the
first error. This allows all the problems with a certificate chain to be
determined.
.PP
The verify operation consists of a number of separate steps.
.PP
Firstly a certificate chain is built up starting from the supplied certificate
and ending in the root CA. It is an error if the whole chain cannot be built
up. The chain is built up by looking up a certificate whose subject name
matches the issuer name of the current certificate. If a certificate is found
whose subject and issuer names are identical it is assumed to be the root CA.
The lookup first looks in the list of untrusted certificates and if no match
is found the remaining lookups are from the trusted certificates. The root CA
is always looked up in the trusted certificate list: if the certificate to
verify is a root certificate then an exact match must be found in the trusted
list.
.PP
The second operation is to check every untrusted certificate's extensions for
consistency with the supplied purpose. If the \fB\-purpose\fR option is not included
then no checks are done. The supplied or \*(L"leaf\*(R" certificate must have extensions
compatible with the supplied purpose and all other certificates must also be valid
CA certificates. The precise extensions required are described in more detail in
the \fBCERTIFICATE EXTENSIONS\fR section of the \fBx509\fR utility.
.PP
The third operation is to check the trust settings on the root CA. The root
CA should be trusted for the supplied purpose. For compatibility with previous
versions of SSLeay and OpenSSL a certificate with no trust settings is considered
to be valid for all purposes. 
.PP
The final operation is to check the validity of the certificate chain. The validity
period is checked against the current system time and the notBefore and notAfter
dates in the certificate. The certificate signatures are also checked at this
point.
.PP
If all operations complete successfully then certificate is considered valid. If
any operation fails then the certificate is not valid.
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
When a verify operation fails the output messages can be somewhat cryptic. The
general form of the error message is:
.PP
.Vb 2
\& server.pem: /C=AU/ST=Queensland/O=CryptSoft Pty Ltd/CN=Test CA (1024 bit)
\& error 24 at 1 depth lookup:invalid CA certificate
.Ve
The first line contains the name of the certificate being verified followed by
the subject name of the certificate. The second line contains the error number
and the depth. The depth is number of the certificate being verified when a
problem was detected starting with zero for the certificate being verified itself
then 1 for the CA that signed the certificate and so on. Finally a text version
of the error number is presented.
.PP
An exhaustive list of the error codes and messages is shown below, this also
includes the name of the error code as defined in the header file x509_vfy.h
Some of the error codes are defined but never returned: these are described
as \*(L"unused\*(R".
.Ip "\fB0 X509_V_OK: ok\fR" 4
the operation was successful.
.Ip "\fB2 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_GET_ISSUER_CERT: unable to get issuer certificate\fR" 4
the issuer certificate could not be found: this occurs if the issuer certificate
of an untrusted certificate cannot be found.
.Ip "\fB3 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_GET_CRL unable to get certificate \s-1CRL\s0\fR" 4
the \s-1CRL\s0 of a certificate could not be found. Unused.
.Ip "\fB4 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_DECRYPT_CERT_SIGNATURE: unable to decrypt certificate's signature\fR" 4
the certificate signature could not be decrypted. This means that the actual signature value
could not be determined rather than it not matching the expected value, this is only
meaningful for \s-1RSA\s0 keys.
.Ip "\fB5 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_DECRYPT_CRL_SIGNATURE: unable to decrypt \s-1CRL\s0's signature\fR" 4
the \s-1CRL\s0 signature could not be decrypted: this means that the actual signature value
could not be determined rather than it not matching the expected value. Unused.
.Ip "\fB6 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_DECODE_ISSUER_PUBLIC_KEY: unable to decode issuer public key\fR" 4
the public key in the certificate SubjectPublicKeyInfo could not be read.
.Ip "\fB7 X509_V_ERR_CERT_SIGNATURE_FAILURE: certificate signature failure\fR" 4
the signature of the certificate is invalid.
.Ip "\fB8 X509_V_ERR_CRL_SIGNATURE_FAILURE: \s-1CRL\s0 signature failure\fR" 4
the signature of the certificate is invalid. Unused.
.Ip "\fB9 X509_V_ERR_CERT_NOT_YET_VALID: certificate is not yet valid\fR" 4
the certificate is not yet valid: the notBefore date is after the current time.
.Ip "\fB10 X509_V_ERR_CRL_NOT_YET_VALID: \s-1CRL\s0 is not yet valid\fR" 4
the \s-1CRL\s0 is not yet valid. Unused.
.Ip "\fB11 X509_V_ERR_CERT_HAS_EXPIRED: Certificate has expired\fR" 4
the certificate has expired: that is the notAfter date is before the current time.
.Ip "\fB12 X509_V_ERR_CRL_HAS_EXPIRED: \s-1CRL\s0 has expired\fR" 4
the \s-1CRL\s0 has expired. Unused.
.Ip "\fB13 X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CERT_NOT_BEFORE_FIELD: format error in certificate's notBefore field\fR" 4
the certificate notBefore field contains an invalid time.
.Ip "\fB14 X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CERT_NOT_AFTER_FIELD: format error in certificate's notAfter field\fR" 4
the certificate notAfter field contains an invalid time.
.Ip "\fB15 X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CRL_LAST_UPDATE_FIELD: format error in \s-1CRL\s0's lastUpdate field\fR" 4
the \s-1CRL\s0 lastUpdate field contains an invalid time. Unused.
.Ip "\fB16 X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CRL_NEXT_UPDATE_FIELD: format error in \s-1CRL\s0's nextUpdate field\fR" 4
the \s-1CRL\s0 nextUpdate field contains an invalid time. Unused.
.Ip "\fB17 X509_V_ERR_OUT_OF_MEM: out of memory\fR" 4
an error occurred trying to allocate memory. This should never happen.
.Ip "\fB18 X509_V_ERR_DEPTH_ZERO_SELF_SIGNED_CERT: self signed certificate\fR" 4
the passed certificate is self signed and the same certificate cannot be found in the list of
trusted certificates.
.Ip "\fB19 X509_V_ERR_SELF_SIGNED_CERT_IN_CHAIN: self signed certificate in certificate chain\fR" 4
the certificate chain could be built up using the untrusted certificates but the root could not
be found locally.
.Ip "\fB20 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_GET_ISSUER_CERT_LOCALLY: unable to get local issuer certificate\fR" 4
the issuer certificate of a locally looked up certificate could not be found. This normally means
the list of trusted certificates is not complete.
.Ip "\fB21 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_VERIFY_LEAF_SIGNATURE: unable to verify the first certificate\fR" 4
no signatures could be verified because the chain contains only one certificate and it is not
self signed.
.Ip "\fB22 X509_V_ERR_CERT_CHAIN_TOO_LONG: certificate chain too long\fR" 4
the certificate chain length is greater than the supplied maximum depth. Unused.
.Ip "\fB23 X509_V_ERR_CERT_REVOKED: certificate revoked\fR" 4
the certificate has been revoked. Unused.
.Ip "\fB24 X509_V_ERR_INVALID_CA: invalid \s-1CA\s0 certificate\fR" 4
a \s-1CA\s0 certificate is invalid. Either it is not a \s-1CA\s0 or its extensions are not consistent
with the supplied purpose.
.Ip "\fB25 X509_V_ERR_PATH_LENGTH_EXCEEDED: path length constraint exceeded\fR" 4
the basicConstraints pathlength parameter has been exceeded.
.Ip "\fB26 X509_V_ERR_INVALID_PURPOSE: unsupported certificate purpose\fR" 4
the supplied certificate cannot be used for the specified purpose.
.Ip "\fB27 X509_V_ERR_CERT_UNTRUSTED: certificate not trusted\fR" 4
the root \s-1CA\s0 is not marked as trusted for the specified purpose.
.Ip "\fB28 X509_V_ERR_CERT_REJECTED: certificate rejected\fR" 4
the root \s-1CA\s0 is marked to reject the specified purpose.
.Ip "\fB50 X509_V_ERR_APPLICATION_VERIFICATION: application verification failure\fR" 4
an application specific error. Unused.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
the \fIx509(1)|x509(1)\fR manpage

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "VERIFY 1"
.IX Name "pkcs7 - PKCS#7 utility"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "COMMAND OPTIONS"

.IX Item "\fB\-CApath directory\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-CAfile file\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-untrusted file\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-purpose purpose\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-help\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-verbose\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-\fR"

.IX Item "\fBcertificates\fR"

.IX Header "VERIFY OPERATION"

.IX Header "DIAGNOSTICS"

.IX Item "\fB0 X509_V_OK: ok\fR"

.IX Item "\fB2 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_GET_ISSUER_CERT: unable to get issuer certificate\fR"

.IX Item "\fB3 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_GET_CRL unable to get certificate \s-1CRL\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB4 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_DECRYPT_CERT_SIGNATURE: unable to decrypt certificate's signature\fR"

.IX Item "\fB5 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_DECRYPT_CRL_SIGNATURE: unable to decrypt \s-1CRL\s0's signature\fR"

.IX Item "\fB6 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_DECODE_ISSUER_PUBLIC_KEY: unable to decode issuer public key\fR"

.IX Item "\fB7 X509_V_ERR_CERT_SIGNATURE_FAILURE: certificate signature failure\fR"

.IX Item "\fB8 X509_V_ERR_CRL_SIGNATURE_FAILURE: \s-1CRL\s0 signature failure\fR"

.IX Item "\fB9 X509_V_ERR_CERT_NOT_YET_VALID: certificate is not yet valid\fR"

.IX Item "\fB10 X509_V_ERR_CRL_NOT_YET_VALID: \s-1CRL\s0 is not yet valid\fR"

.IX Item "\fB11 X509_V_ERR_CERT_HAS_EXPIRED: Certificate has expired\fR"

.IX Item "\fB12 X509_V_ERR_CRL_HAS_EXPIRED: \s-1CRL\s0 has expired\fR"

.IX Item "\fB13 X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CERT_NOT_BEFORE_FIELD: format error in certificate's notBefore field\fR"

.IX Item "\fB14 X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CERT_NOT_AFTER_FIELD: format error in certificate's notAfter field\fR"

.IX Item "\fB15 X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CRL_LAST_UPDATE_FIELD: format error in \s-1CRL\s0's lastUpdate field\fR"

.IX Item "\fB16 X509_V_ERR_ERROR_IN_CRL_NEXT_UPDATE_FIELD: format error in \s-1CRL\s0's nextUpdate field\fR"

.IX Item "\fB17 X509_V_ERR_OUT_OF_MEM: out of memory\fR"

.IX Item "\fB18 X509_V_ERR_DEPTH_ZERO_SELF_SIGNED_CERT: self signed certificate\fR"

.IX Item "\fB19 X509_V_ERR_SELF_SIGNED_CERT_IN_CHAIN: self signed certificate in certificate chain\fR"

.IX Item "\fB20 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_GET_ISSUER_CERT_LOCALLY: unable to get local issuer certificate\fR"

.IX Item "\fB21 X509_V_ERR_UNABLE_TO_VERIFY_LEAF_SIGNATURE: unable to verify the first certificate\fR"

.IX Item "\fB22 X509_V_ERR_CERT_CHAIN_TOO_LONG: certificate chain too long\fR"

.IX Item "\fB23 X509_V_ERR_CERT_REVOKED: certificate revoked\fR"

.IX Item "\fB24 X509_V_ERR_INVALID_CA: invalid \s-1CA\s0 certificate\fR"

.IX Item "\fB25 X509_V_ERR_PATH_LENGTH_EXCEEDED: path length constraint exceeded\fR"

.IX Item "\fB26 X509_V_ERR_INVALID_PURPOSE: unsupported certificate purpose\fR"

.IX Item "\fB27 X509_V_ERR_CERT_UNTRUSTED: certificate not trusted\fR"

.IX Item "\fB28 X509_V_ERR_CERT_REJECTED: certificate rejected\fR"

.IX Item "\fB50 X509_V_ERR_APPLICATION_VERIFICATION: application verification failure\fR"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

