.rn '' }`
'''
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH SESS_ID 1 "0.9.5a" "22/Jul/2000" "OpenSSL"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
sess_id \- SSL/TLS session handling utility
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBopenssl\fR \fBsess_id\fR
[\fB\-inform PEM|DER\fR]
[\fB\-outform PEM|DER\fR]
[\fB\-in filename\fR]
[\fB\-out filename\fR]
[\fB\-text\fR]
[\fB\-noout\fR]
[\fB\-context ID\fR]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The \fBsess_id\fR process the encoded version of the SSL session structure
and optionally prints out SSL session details (for example the SSL session
master key) in human readable format. Since this is a diagnostic tool that
needs some knowledge of the SSL protocol to use properly, most users will
not need to use it.
.Ip "\fB\-inform \s-1DER\s0|\s-1PEM\s0\fR" 4
This specifies the input format. The \fB\s-1DER\s0\fR option uses an \s-1ASN1\s0 \s-1DER\s0 encoded
format containing session details. The precise format can vary from one version
to the next.  The \fB\s-1PEM\s0\fR form is the default format: it consists of the \fB\s-1DER\s0\fR
format base64 encoded with additional header and footer lines.
.Ip "\fB\-outform \s-1DER\s0|\s-1PEM\s0\fR" 4
This specifies the output format, the options have the same meaning as the 
\fB\-inform\fR option.
.Ip "\fB\-in filename\fR" 4
This specifies the input filename to read session information from or standard
input by default.
.Ip "\fB\-out filename\fR" 4
This specifies the output filename to write session information to or standard
output if this option is not specified.
.Ip "\fB\-text\fR" 4
prints out the various public or private key components in
plain text in addition to the encoded version. 
.Ip "\fB\-cert\fR" 4
if a certificate is present in the session it will be output using this option,
if the \fB\-text\fR option is also present then it will be printed out in text form.
.Ip "\fB\-noout\fR" 4
this option prevents output of the encoded version of the session.
.Ip "\fB\-context \s-1ID\s0\fR" 4
this option can set the session id so the output session information uses the
supplied \s-1ID\s0. The \s-1ID\s0 can be any string of characters. This option wont normally
be used.
.SH "OUTPUT"
Typical output:
.PP
.Vb 10
\& SSL-Session:
\&     Protocol  : TLSv1
\&     Cipher    : 0016
\&     Session-ID: 871E62626C554CE95488823752CBD5F3673A3EF3DCE9C67BD916C809914B40ED
\&     Session-ID-ctx: 01000000
\&     Master-Key: A7CEFC571974BE02CAC305269DC59F76EA9F0B180CB6642697A68251F2D2BB57E51DBBB4C7885573192AE9AEE220FACD
\&     Key-Arg   : None
\&     Start Time: 948459261
\&     Timeout   : 300 (sec)
\&     Verify return code 0 (ok)
.Ve
Theses are described below in more detail.
.Ip "\fBProtocol\fR" 4
this is the protocol in use TLSv1, SSLv3 or SSLv2.
.Ip "\fBCipher\fR" 4
the cipher used this is the actual raw \s-1SSL\s0 or \s-1TLS\s0 cipher code, see the \s-1SSL\s0
or \s-1TLS\s0 specifications for more information.
.Ip "\fBSession-\s-1ID\s0\fR" 4
the \s-1SSL\s0 session \s-1ID\s0 in hex format.
.Ip "\fBSession-\s-1ID\s0\-ctx\fR" 4
the session \s-1ID\s0 context in hex format.
.Ip "\fBMaster-Key\fR" 4
this is the \s-1SSL\s0 session master key.
.Ip "\fBKey-Arg\fR" 4
the key argument, this is only used in \s-1SSL\s0 v2.
.Ip "\fBStart Time\fR" 4
this is the session start time represented as an integer in standard Unix format.
.Ip "\fBTimeout\fR" 4
the timeout in seconds.
.Ip "\fBVerify return code\fR" 4
this is the return code when an \s-1SSL\s0 client certificate is verified.
.SH "NOTES"
The PEM encoded session format uses the header and footer lines:
.PP
.Vb 2
\& -----BEGIN SSL SESSION PARAMETERS-----
\& -----END SSL SESSION PARAMETERS-----
.Ve
Since the SSL session output contains the master key it is possible to read the contents
of an encrypted session using this information. Therefore appropriate security precautions
should be taken if the information is being output by a \*(L"real\*(R" application. This is
however strongly discouraged and should only be used for debugging purposes.
.SH "BUGS"
The cipher and start time should be printed out in human readable form.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
the \fIciphers(1)|ciphers(1)\fR manpage, the \fIs_server(1)|s_server(1)\fR manpage

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "SESS_ID 1"
.IX Name "sess_id - SSL/TLS session handling utility"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Item "\fB\-inform \s-1DER\s0|\s-1PEM\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-outform \s-1DER\s0|\s-1PEM\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-in filename\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-out filename\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-text\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-cert\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-noout\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-context \s-1ID\s0\fR"

.IX Header "OUTPUT"

.IX Item "\fBProtocol\fR"

.IX Item "\fBCipher\fR"

.IX Item "\fBSession-\s-1ID\s0\fR"

.IX Item "\fBSession-\s-1ID\s0\-ctx\fR"

.IX Item "\fBMaster-Key\fR"

.IX Item "\fBKey-Arg\fR"

.IX Item "\fBStart Time\fR"

.IX Item "\fBTimeout\fR"

.IX Item "\fBVerify return code\fR"

.IX Header "NOTES"

.IX Header "BUGS"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

