.\"	$NetBSD: tests.kyua.7,v 1.7 2015/07/30 03:21:33 jnemeth Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND
.\" CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE
.\" GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
.\" IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
.\" OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN
.\" IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 29, 2015
.Dt TESTS 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tests
.Nd introduction to the NetBSD test suite
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nx
test suite provides a collection of automated tests for two major purposes.
On the one hand, the test suite aids
.Em developers
in catching bugs and regressions in the code when they performing modifications
to the source tree.
On the other hand, the test suite allows
.Em end users
(and, in particular, system administrators) to verify that fresh installations
of the
.Nx
operating system behave correctly in their hardware platform and also to ensure
that the system does not suffer from regressions during regular system
operation and maintenance.
.Pp
The
.Nx
test suite is distributed as a separate installation set, named
.Pa tests.tgz ,
and the test programs are all installed under the
.Pa /usr/tests
hierarchy.
.Pp
This manual page describes how to execute the test suite and how to configure
some of its optional features.
.Ss When to run the tests?
Before diving into the details of how to run the test suite, here are some
scenarios in which you should be running them:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
After a fresh installation of
.Nx
to ensure that the system works correctly on your hardware platform.
.It
After an upgrade of
.Nx
to a different version to ensure that the new code works well on your
hardware platform and that the upgrade did not introduce regressions in your
configuration.
.It
After performing changes to the source tree to catch any bugs and/or regressions
introduced by the modifications.
.It
Periodically, maybe from a
.Xr cron 8
job, to ensure that any changes to the system (such as the installation of
third-party packages or manual modifications to configuration files) do not
introduce unexpected failures.
.El
.Ss Installing the tests
If you chose to install the
.Pa tests.tgz
distribution set while setting up your
.Nx
system, the tests are already available in
.Pa /usr/tests .
Otherwise, install the set now by running:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# cd /
# tar xzpf /path/to/tests.tgz
.Ed
.Ss Running the tests
Use the following command to run the whole test suite:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua test -k /usr/tests/Kyuafile
.Ed
.Pp
The above will go through all test programs in
.Pa /usr/tests
recursively, execute them, store their results and debugging data in Kyua
database (by default in
.Pa ~/.kyua/store.db ) ,
and print a summary of the results.
This summary includes a brief count of all total tests run and how many of
them failed.
.Pp
It is possible to restrict which tests to run by providing their names in
the command line.
For example, this would execute the tests for the
.Xr cp 1
and
.Xr cut 1
utilities:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua test -k /usr/tests/Kyuafile bin/cp usr.bin/cut
.Ed
.Ss Obtaining reports of the tests execution
Additional information of the results of the execution can be later extracted
from the database by using the various reporting commands of Kyua.
For example, the following would extract a plain-text report of the executed
tests and show which ones failed:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua report
.Ed
.Pp
This other example would generate an HTML report ready to be published on a
web server, possibly the built-in
.Xr httpd 8 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua report-html --output ~/public_html/tests
.Ed
.Pp
For further details on the command-line interface of Kyua, please refer
to its manual page
.Xr kyua 1 .
.Ss Test environment considerations
Tests can be invoked as an unprivileged user, in which case tests that
require privileges will be skipped.
If run as root, an unprivileged user will be used for tests that
do not require privileges.
For maximal coverage, the standard approach is to invoke tests as root.
.Pp
Ideally, tests are self-contained and do not either depend on or
perturb the host environment, aside from skipping tests when optional
facilities are not available.
In reality, tests load and unload modules, and do other things that
might cause problems.
While it is not entirely safe to run tests on a multi-user system,
permanent problems or crashes from doing so are viewed as bugs and
should be reported.
.Ss Configuring the tests
Some test cases in the
.Nx
test suite require the administrator to manually set up some configuration
properties before they can run.
Unless these properties are defined, the tests that require them will be marked
as skipped and thus they will not be really executed.
.Pp
Test suites are configured by defining the values to their configuration
variables in
.Pa /etc/kyua/kyua.conf .
The format of this file is detailed in
.Xr kyua.conf 5 .
.Pp
The following configuration variables are available in the
.Nx
test suite:
.Bl -tag -width "fstype"
.It fstype
When set to a filesystem type, restrict tests programs from the
.Pa /usr/tests/fs/vfs/ .
.El
.Ss What to do if something fails?
If there is
.Em any failure
during the execution of the test suite, please considering reporting it to the
.Nx
developers so that the failure can be analyzed and fixed.
To do so, either send a message to the appropriate mailing list or file a
problem report.
For more details please refer to:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Lk http://www.netbsd.org/mailinglists/ "NetBSD mailing lists"
.It
.Lk http://www.netbsd.org/support/send-pr.html "NetBSD Problem Reports"
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -compact -width etcXatfXNetBSDXconfXX
.It Pa /etc/kyua/kyua.conf
System-wide configuration file for
.Xr kyua 1 .
.It Pa ~/.kyua/kyua.conf
User-specific configuration file for
.Xr kyua 1 ;
overrides the system file.
.It Pa ~/.kyua/store.db
Default database used by Kyua to maintain the data of the executed tests.
.It Pa /usr/tests/
Location of the
.Nx
test suite.
.It Pa /usr/tests/Kyuafile
Top-level test suite definition file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kyua 1 ,
.Xr kyua-report 1 ,
.Xr kyua-test 1
.Sh HISTORY
The collection of test programs in
.Pa /usr/tests
first appeared in
.Nx 5.0
and has been growing since then.
.Pp
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Nx 6.0
and was updated in
.Nx 7.0
to describe the execution of the tests with Kyua rather than with ATF.
.Pp
The ATF testing framework was first distributed with
.Nx 5.0
and the runtime tools of this framework are being phased out in
.Nx 7.0 .
Note that the
.Em libraries
that ship with ATF are still in active use and are not deprecated.
.Pp
The Kyua testing toolkit was first distributed with
.Nx 7.0 .
The
.Xr atf-run 1
and
.Xr atf-report 1
tools were replaced as part of this import to be backwards-compatibility
wrappers around
.Xr kyua 1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Julio Merino Aq Mt jmmv@NetBSD.org
