.\"	$NetBSD: gsckbc.4,v 1.1.8.2 2014/08/20 00:02:36 tls Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Jochen Kunz.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of Jochen Kunz may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior
.\"    written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOCHEN KUNZ
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL JOCHEN KUNZ
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd August 20, 2004
.Dt GSCKBC 4 hppa
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gsckbc
.Nd GSC PS/2 keyboard and mouse interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "gsckbc* at gsc?"
.Cd "pckbd*  at gsckbc?"
.Cd "pms*    at gsckbc?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device is a machine dependent front end to the
.Xr pckbport 9
interface.
It attaches to the GSC PS/2 keyboard and mouse interface found in LASI chips.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "gsckbc_attach: can't map I/O space"
The driver was not able to map the device registers during attachment.
The device will not be usable.
.It "can't find master device"
An error occurred during attachment of the keyboard port so the mouse port
can't be attached too.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gsc 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr io 4 ,
.Xr lasi 4 ,
.Xr pckbport 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Nx 2.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jochen Kunz
.Sh BUGS
Actually the two PS/2 ports are a single device and share a single interrupt.
The firmware lists them as individual devices in the firmware device tree.
This illusion is kept to map the firmware device tree as close as possible
to the kernel device tree.
The first device is caled master, gets the interrupt and the other is the
slave.
Assumption: Master attaches first, gets the interrupt and has lower HPA.
So it is important that the master device, usually the keyboard port,
attaches first to make the slave, usually the mouse port, usable.
