.\"     $NetBSD: lom.4,v 1.4.16.1 2014/08/20 00:02:36 tls Exp $
.\"     $OpenBSD: lom.4,v 1.4 2009/09/23 22:08:07 kettenis Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Mark Kettenis <kettenis@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd December 28, 2009
.Dt LOM 4 sparc64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lom
.Nd lights out management
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "lom* at ebus?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the LOMlite lights out management module
found on Sun Netra t1 systems and the LOMlite2 module found on Sun
Fire V100/V120 and Sun Netra T1/X1 systems.
Fault LED and alarms status, temperature readings, PSU status and
fan status provided by the LOM are made available through the
.Xr envstat 8
interface.
The integrated watchdog timer can be configured through the
.Xr wdogctl 8
interface.
The watchdog timer supports timeouts between 1 and 126 seconds.
.Pp
Fault LED and alarms status can be changed through the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface.
An entry for the
.Nm
driver is created under the
.Va hw.lom Ns Em N
MIB.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver will update the hostname stored in the LOM whenever the
system's hostname is changed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hostname 1 ,
.Xr envsys 4 ,
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr wdogctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.7
and was then ported to
.Nx 5.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Mark Kettenis Aq Mt kettenis@openbsd.org .
