(This file is under construction.)			-*- text -*-

If you've contributed to gas and your name isn't listed here, it is
not meant as a slight.  I just don't know about it.  Email me,
nickc@redhat.com and I'll correct the situation.

This file will eventually be deleted: The general info will go into
the documentation, and info on specific files will go into an AUTHORS
file, as requested by the FSF.

++++++++++++++++

Dean Elsner wrote the original gas for vax.  [more details?]

Jay Fenlason maintained gas for a while, adding support for
gdb-specific debug information and the 68k series machines, most of
the preprocessing pass, and extensive changes in messages.c,
input-file.c, write.c.

K. Richard Pixley maintained gas for a while, adding various
enhancements and many bug fixes, including merging support for several
processors, breaking gas up to handle multiple object file format
backends (including heavy rewrite, testing, an integration of the coff
and b.out backends), adding configuration including heavy testing and
verification of cross assemblers and file splits and renaming,
converted gas to strictly ansi C including full prototypes, added
support for m680[34]0 & cpu32, considerable work on i960 including a
coff port (including considerable amounts of reverse engineering), a
sparc opcode file rewrite, decstation, rs6000, and hp300hpux host
ports, updated "know" assertions and made them work, much other
reorganization, cleanup, and lint.

Ken Raeburn wrote the high-level BFD interface code to replace most of
the code in format-specific I/O modules.

The original Vax-VMS support was contributed by David L. Kashtan.
Eric Youngdale and Pat Rankin have done much work with it since.

The Intel 80386 machine description was written by Eliot Dresselhaus.

Minh Tran-Le at IntelliCorp contributed some AIX 386 support.

The Motorola 88k machine description was contributed by Devon Bowen of
Buffalo University and Torbjorn Granlund of the Swedish Institute of
Computer Science.

Keith Knowles at the Open Software Foundation wrote the original MIPS
back end (tc-mips.c, tc-mips.h), and contributed Rose format support
that hasn't been merged in yet.  Ralph Campbell worked with the MIPS
code to support a.out format.

Support for the Zilog Z8k and Hitachi H8/300, H8/500 and SH processors
(tc-z8k, tc-h8300, tc-h8500, tc-sh), and IEEE 695 object file format
(obj-ieee), was written by Steve Chamberlain of Cygnus Solutions.
Steve also modified the COFF back end (obj-coffbfd) to use BFD for
some low-level operations, for use with the Hitachi, 29k and Zilog
targets.

John Gilmore built the AMD 29000 support, added .include support, and
simplified the configuration of which versions accept which
pseudo-ops.  He updated the 68k machine description so that Motorola's
opcodes always produced fixed-size instructions (e.g. jsr), while
synthetic instructions remained shrinkable (jbsr).  John fixed many
bugs, including true tested cross-compilation support, and one bug in
relaxation that took a week and required the proverbial one-bit fix.

Ian Lance Taylor of Cygnus Solutions merged the Motorola and MIT
syntaxes for the 68k, completed support for some COFF targets (68k,
i386 SVR3, and SCO Unix), wrote the ECOFF support based on Michael
Meissner's mips-tfile program, wrote the PowerPC and RS/6000 support,
and made a few other minor patches.  He handled the binutils releases
for versions 2.7 through 2.9.

David Edelsohn contributed fixes for the PowerPC and AIX support.

Steve Chamberlain made gas able to generate listings.

Support for the HP9000/300 was contributed by Glenn Engel of HP.

Support for ELF format files has been worked on by Mark Eichin of
Cygnus Solutions (original, incomplete implementation), Pete
Hoogenboom at the University of Utah (HPPA mainly), Michael Meissner
of the Open Software Foundation (i386 mainly), and Ken Raeburn of
Cygnus Solutions (sparc, initial 64-bit support).

Several engineers at Cygnus Solutions have also provided many small
bug fixes and configuration enhancements.

The initial Alpha support was contributed by Carnegie-Mellon
University.  Additional work was done by Ken Raeburn of Cygnus
Solutions.  Richard Henderson then rewrote much of the Alpha support.

Ian Dall updated the support code for the National Semiconductor 32000
series, and added support for Mach 3 and NetBSD running on the PC532.

Klaus Kaempf ported the assembler and the binutils to openVMS/Alpha.

Steve Haworth contributed the support for the Texas Instruction c30
(tms320c30).

H.J. Lu has contributed many patches and much testing.

Alan Modra reworked much of the i386 backend, improving the error
checking, updating the code, and improving the 16 bit support, using
patches from the work of Martynas Kunigelis and H.J. Lu.

Many others have contributed large or small bugfixes and enhancements.  If
you've contributed significant work and are not mentioned on this list, and
want to be, let us know.  Some of the history has been lost; we aren't
intentionally leaving anyone out.
