.\"	$NetBSD: autoconf.4,v 1.12 2022/06/17 16:43:52 tsutsui Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)autoconf.4	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/9/93
.\"
.Dd June 17, 2022
.Dt AUTOCONF 4 hp300
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm autoconf
.Nd diagnostics from the autoconfiguration code
.Sh DESCRIPTION
When
.Nx
bootstraps it probes the innards of the machine
on which it is running
and locates controllers, drives, and other devices, printing out
what it finds on the console.
This procedure is driven by a system
configuration table which is processed by
.Xr config 1
and compiled into each kernel.
.Pp
Autoconfiguration on the
.Tn HP300 Ns s
is similar to that on the
.Tn VAX ,
the primary difference is in the naming conventions.
On the
.Tn HP300 ,
if devices exist which are not configured they will be ignored;
if devices exist of unsupported type they will be ignored.
.Pp
Normally, the system uses the disk from which it was loaded as the root
filesystem.
If that is not possible,
a generic system will use
.Sq Li rd0
if it exists.
If such a system is booted with the
.Dv RB_ASKNAME
option (see
.Xr reboot 2 ) ,
then the name of the root device is read from the console terminal at boot
time, and any available device may be used.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It SPU type not configured
You tried to boot
.Nx
on an SPU type which it doesn't
(or at least this compiled version of
.Nx
doesn't) understand.
.It nhpib%d at intio0 addr 0x478000 ipl %d
.It nhpib%d at dio0 scode %d ipl %d
.It fhpib%d at dio0 scode %d ipl %d
.It hpibbus%d at nhpib%d
.It hpibbus%d at fhpib%d
An
.Tn HP-IB
was found at the internal bus or scode %d (the select code)
with ipl %d (interrupt priority level).
.Nx
will call it hpibbus%d.
.It %s%d at hpibbus%d slave %d punit %d
.It %s%d: %s
An
.Tn HP-IB
disk or tape controller was found.
For disks
.Ql %s%d
will look like
.Sq Li rd0 ,
for tapes like
.Sq Li ct0 .
The
.Ql %s
in the first line will be a product type like ``7945A'' or ``9144''.
The slave number comes from the address select switches on the drive.
.It dvbox0 at intio0 addr 0x560000
.It dvbox%d at dio0 scode %d
.It gbox0 at intio0 addr 0x560000
.It gbox%d at dio0 scode %d
.It hyper%d at dio0 scode %d
.It rbox0 at intio0 addr 0x560000
.It rbox%d at dio0 scode %d
.It topcat0 at intio0 addr 0x560000
.It topcat%d at dio0 scode %d
.It tvrx%d at dio0 scode %d
.It gendiofb%d at dio0 scode %d
.It sti%d at sgc0 slot %d
A bit mapped display was found either at the ``internal'' address,
at some ``external'' select code,
or at some SGC bus slot.
If it exists, the internal display will always be unit 0.
.It %s%d at dio0 scode %d ipl %d
Another peripheral controller was found at the indicated select code
and with indicated interrupt priority level.
.Ql %s
will be one of
.Xr com 4
(single-port serial interfaces),
.Xr hp300/dcm 4
(four-port serial interfaces), or
.Xr le 4
.Pf ( Tn LAN
cards).
The slave number comes from the address select switches on the interface card.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr config 1 ,
.Xr hp300/intro 4 ,
.Xr boot 8
.Rs
.%T 4.3BSD for the HP300
.%O in the distribution documentation package
.Re
