.\"	$NetBSD: ace.4,v 1.3 2011/03/21 17:09:09 njoly Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This file is derived from work contributed by Microsoft Corporation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 17, 2010
.Dt ACE 4 emips
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ace
.Nd
ACE disk adaptor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ace* at ebus0 addr ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn Xilinx
SystemACE Compact-FLASH card adaptor used in the Xilinx XUP, ML401, ML401.
.Pp
The
.Nm
is a medium-performance implementation of the CF interface.
.Pp
The
.Nm
chip currently does not support DMA and the CPU must copy data using programmed-I/O.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ebus 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
