.\"	$NetBSD: dz.4,v 1.2 2011/02/14 21:13:17 pooka Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This file is derived from work contributed by Microsoft Corporation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 17, 2010
.Dt DZ 4 emips
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dz
.Nd
.Tn eMIPS
console serial device interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "dz* at ebus0 addr ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This serial line provides a simple communication line with no modem control.
It is not adequate for
.Ux
dialup use.
.Pp
Normal I/O
control parameters for individual lines are managed by
.Xr ioctl 2
calls.
Line speeds may be initiated via
the
.Xr ttys 5
file,
.Xr stty 1
or
.Xr ifconfig 8
to name a few,
see
.Xr tty 4 .
.Pp
The
.Nm dz
driver monitors the rate of input on each board,
and switches between the use of character-at-a-time interrupts
and input silos.
While the silo is enabled during periods of high-speed input,
the driver polls for input 30 times per second.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/tty[0-9][0-9]xx -compact
.It Pa /dev/ttyD0
phys interface.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It dz%d: silo overflow .
The 1 character input silo overflowed
before it could be serviced.  This can happen if a hard error occurs
when the
.Tn CPU
is running with elevated priority, as the system will
then print a message on the console with interrupts disabled.
It is not serious.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr stty 1 ,
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr ttys 5 ,
.Xr getty 8
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
