This is texinfo, produced by makeinfo version 4.8 from
/Users/sidqian/Downloads/summer/L2S/netbsd-src/tools/texinfo/../../external/gpl2/texinfo/dist/doc/texinfo.txi.

  This manual is for GNU Texinfo (version 4.8, 29 December 2004), a
documentation system that can produce both online information and a
printed manual from a single source.

  Copyright (C) 1988, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998,
1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
     document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
     Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
     Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts
     being "A GNU Manual," and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a)
     below.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
     "GNU Free Documentation License."

     (a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: "You have freedom to copy and
     modify this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by
     the Free Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development."

INFO-DIR-SECTION Texinfo documentation system
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Texinfo: (texinfo).           The GNU documentation format.
* install-info: (texinfo)Invoking install-info. Update info/dir entries.
* texi2dvi: (texinfo)Format with texi2dvi.      Print Texinfo documents.
* texi2pdf: (texinfo)PDF Output.                PDF output for Texinfo.
* texindex: (texinfo)Format with tex/texindex.  Sort Texinfo index files.
* makeinfo: (texinfo)Invoking makeinfo.         Translate Texinfo source.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY


File: texinfo,  Node: makeinfo Preferred,  Next: Debugging with Info,  Up: Catching Mistakes

F.1 `makeinfo' Find Errors
==========================

The `makeinfo' program does an excellent job of catching errors and
reporting them--far better than `texinfo-format-region' or
`texinfo-format-buffer'.  In addition, the various functions for
automatically creating and updating node pointers and menus remove many
opportunities for human error.

  If you can, use the updating commands to create and insert pointers
and menus.  These prevent many errors.  Then use `makeinfo' (or its
Texinfo mode manifestations, `makeinfo-region' and `makeinfo-buffer')
to format your file and check for other errors.  This is the best way
to work with Texinfo.  But if you cannot use `makeinfo', or your
problem is very puzzling, then you may want to use the tools described
in this appendix.


File: texinfo,  Node: Debugging with Info,  Next: Debugging with TeX,  Prev: makeinfo Preferred,  Up: Catching Mistakes

F.2 Catching Errors with Info Formatting
========================================

After you have written part of a Texinfo file, you can use the
`texinfo-format-region' or the `makeinfo-region' command to see whether
the region formats properly.

  Most likely, however, you are reading this section because for some
reason you cannot use the `makeinfo-region' command; therefore, the
rest of this section presumes that you are using
`texinfo-format-region'.

  If you have made a mistake with an @-command, `texinfo-format-region'
will stop processing at or after the error and display an error
message.  To see where in the buffer the error occurred, switch to the
`*Info Region*' buffer; the cursor will be in a position that is after
the location of the error.  Also, the text will not be formatted after
the place where the error occurred (or more precisely, where it was
detected).

  For example, if you accidentally end a menu with the command `@end
menus' with an `s' on the end, instead of with `@end menu', you will
see an error message that says:

     @end menus is not handled by texinfo

The cursor will stop at the point in the buffer where the error occurs,
or not long after it.  The buffer will look like this:

     ---------- Buffer: *Info Region* ----------
     * Menu:

     * Using texinfo-show-structure::  How to use
                                      `texinfo-show-structure'
                                      to catch mistakes.
     * Running Info-Validate::         How to check for
                                      unreferenced nodes.
     @end menus
     -!-
     ---------- Buffer: *Info Region* ----------

  The `texinfo-format-region' command sometimes provides slightly odd
error messages.  For example, the following cross reference fails to
format:

     (@xref{Catching Mistakes, for more info.)

In this case, `texinfo-format-region' detects the missing closing brace
but displays a message that says `Unbalanced parentheses' rather than
`Unbalanced braces'.  This is because the formatting command looks for
mismatches between braces as if they were parentheses.

  Sometimes `texinfo-format-region' fails to detect mistakes.  For
example, in the following, the closing brace is swapped with the
closing parenthesis:

     (@xref{Catching Mistakes), for more info.}

Formatting produces:
     (*Note for more info.: Catching Mistakes)

  The only way for you to detect this error is to realize that the
reference should have looked like this:

     (*Note Catching Mistakes::, for more info.)

  Incidentally, if you are reading this node in Info and type `f <RET>'
(`Info-follow-reference'), you will generate an error message that says:

     No such node: "Catching Mistakes) The only way ...

This is because Info perceives the example of the error as the first
cross reference in this node and if you type a <RET> immediately after
typing the Info `f' command, Info will attempt to go to the referenced
node.  If you type `f catch <TAB> <RET>', Info will complete the node
name of the correctly written example and take you to the `Catching
Mistakes' node.  (If you try this, you can return from the `Catching
Mistakes' node by typing `l' (`Info-last').)


File: texinfo,  Node: Debugging with TeX,  Next: Using texinfo-show-structure,  Prev: Debugging with Info,  Up: Catching Mistakes

F.3 Catching Errors with TeX Formatting
=======================================

You can also catch mistakes when you format a file with TeX.

  Usually, you will want to do this after you have run
`texinfo-format-buffer' (or, better, `makeinfo-buffer') on the same
file, because `texinfo-format-buffer' sometimes displays error messages
that make more sense than TeX.  (*Note Debugging with Info::, for more
information.)

  For example, TeX was run on a Texinfo file, part of which is shown
here:

     ---------- Buffer: texinfo.texi ----------
     name of the Texinfo file as an extension.  The
     @samp{??} are `wildcards' that cause the shell to
     substitute all the raw index files.  (@xref{sorting
     indices, for more information about sorting
     indices.)@refill
     ---------- Buffer: texinfo.texi ----------

(The cross reference lacks a closing brace.)  TeX produced the
following output, after which it stopped:

     ---------- Buffer: *tex-shell* ----------
     Runaway argument?
     {sorting indices, for more information about sorting
     indices.) @refill @ETC.
     ! Paragraph ended before @xref was complete.
     <to be read again>
                       @par
     l.27

     ?
     ---------- Buffer: *tex-shell* ----------

  In this case, TeX produced an accurate and understandable error
message:

     Paragraph ended before @xref was complete.

`@par' is an internal TeX command of no relevance to Texinfo.  `l.27'
means that TeX detected the problem on line 27 of the Texinfo file.
The `?' is the prompt TeX uses in this circumstance.

  Unfortunately, TeX is not always so helpful, and sometimes you must
truly be a Sherlock Holmes to discover what went wrong.

  In any case, if you run into a problem like this, you can do one of
three things.

  1. You can tell TeX to continue running and ignore just this error by
     typing <RET> at the `?' prompt.

  2. You can tell TeX to continue running and to ignore all errors as
     best it can by typing `r <RET>' at the `?' prompt.

     This is often the best thing to do.  However, beware: the one error
     may produce a cascade of additional error messages as its
     consequences are felt through the rest of the file.  To stop TeX
     when it is producing such an avalanche of error messages, type
     `C-c' (or `C-c C-c', if you are running a shell inside Emacs).

  3. You can tell TeX to stop this run by typing `x <RET>' at the `?'
     prompt.

  If you are running TeX inside Emacs, you need to switch to the shell
buffer and line at which TeX offers the `?' prompt.

  Sometimes TeX will format a file without producing error messages even
though there is a problem.  This usually occurs if a command is not
ended but TeX is able to continue processing anyhow.  For example, if
you fail to end an itemized list with the `@end itemize' command, TeX
will write a DVI file that you can print out.  The only error message
that TeX will give you is the somewhat mysterious comment that

     (@end occurred inside a group at level 1)

However, if you print the DVI file, you will find that the text of the
file that follows the itemized list is entirely indented as if it were
part of the last item in the itemized list.  The error message is the
way TeX says that it expected to find an `@end' command somewhere in
the file; but that it could not determine where it was needed.

  Another source of notoriously hard-to-find errors is a missing `@end
group' command.  If you ever are stumped by incomprehensible errors,
look for a missing `@end group' command first.

  If the Texinfo file lacks header lines, TeX may stop in the beginning
of its run and display output that looks like the following.  The `*'
indicates that TeX is waiting for input.

     This is TeX, Version 3.14159 (Web2c 7.0)
     (test.texinfo [1])
     *

In this case, simply type `\end <RET>' after the asterisk.  Then write
the header lines in the Texinfo file and run the TeX command again.
(Note the use of the backslash, `\'.  TeX uses `\' instead of `@'; and
in this circumstance, you are working directly with TeX, not with
Texinfo.)


File: texinfo,  Node: Using texinfo-show-structure,  Next: Using occur,  Prev: Debugging with TeX,  Up: Catching Mistakes

F.4 Using `texinfo-show-structure'
==================================

It is not always easy to keep track of the nodes, chapters, sections,
and subsections of a Texinfo file.  This is especially true if you are
revising or adding to a Texinfo file that someone else has written.

  In GNU Emacs, in Texinfo mode, the `texinfo-show-structure' command
lists all the lines that begin with the @-commands that specify the
structure: `@chapter', `@section', `@appendix', and so on.  With an
argument (`C-u' as prefix argument, if interactive), the command also
shows the `@node' lines.  The `texinfo-show-structure' command is bound
to `C-c C-s' in Texinfo mode, by default.

  The lines are displayed in a buffer called the `*Occur*' buffer,
indented by hierarchical level.  For example, here is a part of what was
produced by running `texinfo-show-structure' on this manual:

     Lines matching "^@\\(chapter \\|sect\\|subs\\|subh\\|
     unnum\\|major\\|chapheading \\|heading \\|appendix\\)"
     in buffer texinfo.texi.
     ...
     4177:@chapter Nodes
     4198:    @heading Two Paths
     4231:    @section Node and Menu Illustration
     4337:    @section The @code{@@node} Command
     4393:        @subheading Choosing Node and Pointer Names
     4417:        @subsection How to Write an @code{@@node} Line
     4469:        @subsection @code{@@node} Line Tips
     ...

  This says that lines 4337, 4393, and 4417 of `texinfo.texi' begin
with the `@section', `@subheading', and `@subsection' commands
respectively.  If you move your cursor into the `*Occur*' window, you
can position the cursor over one of the lines and use the `C-c C-c'
command (`occur-mode-goto-occurrence'), to jump to the corresponding
spot in the Texinfo file.  *Note Using Occur: (emacs)Other Repeating
Search, for more information about `occur-mode-goto-occurrence'.

  The first line in the `*Occur*' window describes the "regular
expression" specified by TEXINFO-HEADING-PATTERN.  This regular
expression is the pattern that `texinfo-show-structure' looks for.
*Note Using Regular Expressions: (emacs)Regexps, for more information.

  When you invoke the `texinfo-show-structure' command, Emacs will
display the structure of the whole buffer.  If you want to see the
structure of just a part of the buffer, of one chapter, for example,
use the `C-x n n' (`narrow-to-region') command to mark the region.
(*Note Narrowing: (emacs)Narrowing.)  This is how the example used
above was generated.  (To see the whole buffer again, use `C-x n w'
(`widen').)

  If you call `texinfo-show-structure' with a prefix argument by typing
`C-u C-c C-s', it will list lines beginning with `@node' as well as the
lines beginning with the @-sign commands for `@chapter', `@section',
and the like.

  You can remind yourself of the structure of a Texinfo file by looking
at the list in the `*Occur*' window; and if you have mis-named a node
or left out a section, you can correct the mistake.


File: texinfo,  Node: Using occur,  Next: Running Info-Validate,  Prev: Using texinfo-show-structure,  Up: Catching Mistakes

F.5 Using `occur'
=================

Sometimes the `texinfo-show-structure' command produces too much
information.  Perhaps you want to remind yourself of the overall
structure of a Texinfo file, and are overwhelmed by the detailed list
produced by `texinfo-show-structure'.  In this case, you can use the
`occur' command directly.  To do this, type

     M-x occur

and then, when prompted, type a "regexp", a regular expression for the
pattern you want to match.  (*Note Regular Expressions:
(emacs)Regexps.)  The `occur' command works from the current location
of the cursor in the buffer to the end of the buffer.  If you want to
run `occur' on the whole buffer, place the cursor at the beginning of
the buffer.

  For example, to see all the lines that contain the word `@chapter' in
them, just type `@chapter'.  This will produce a list of the chapters.
It will also list all the sentences with `@chapter' in the middle of
the line.

  If you want to see only those lines that start with the word
`@chapter', type `^@chapter' when prompted by `occur'.  If you want to
see all the lines that end with a word or phrase, end the last word
with a `$'; for example, `catching mistakes$'.  This can be helpful
when you want to see all the nodes that are part of the same chapter or
section and therefore have the same `Up' pointer.

  *Note Using Occur: (emacs)Other Repeating Search, for more
information.


File: texinfo,  Node: Running Info-Validate,  Prev: Using occur,  Up: Catching Mistakes

F.6 Finding Badly Referenced Nodes
==================================

You can use the `Info-validate' command to check whether any of the
`Next', `Previous', `Up' or other node pointers fail to point to a
node.  This command checks that every node pointer points to an
existing node.  The `Info-validate' command works only on Info files,
not on Texinfo files.

  The `makeinfo' program validates pointers automatically, so you do
not need to use the `Info-validate' command if you are using
`makeinfo'.  You only may need to use `Info-validate' if you are unable
to run `makeinfo' and instead must create an Info file using
`texinfo-format-region' or `texinfo-format-buffer', or if you write an
Info file from scratch.

* Menu:

* Using Info-validate::         How to run `Info-validate'.
* Unsplit::                     How to create an unsplit file.
* Tagifying::                   How to tagify a file.
* Splitting::                   How to split a file manually.


File: texinfo,  Node: Using Info-validate,  Next: Unsplit,  Up: Running Info-Validate

F.6.1 Running `Info-validate'
-----------------------------

To use `Info-validate', visit the Info file you wish to check and type:

     M-x Info-validate

Note that the `Info-validate' command requires an upper case `I'.  You
may also need to create a tag table before running `Info-validate'.
*Note Tagifying::.

  If your file is valid, you will receive a message that says "File
appears valid".  However, if you have a pointer that does not point to
a node, error messages will be displayed in a buffer called `*problems
in info file*'.

  For example, `Info-validate' was run on a test file that contained
only the first node of this manual.  One of the messages said:

     In node "Overview", invalid Next: Texinfo Mode

This meant that the node called `Overview' had a `Next' pointer that
did not point to anything (which was true in this case, since the test
file had only one node in it).

  Now suppose we add a node named `Texinfo Mode' to our test case but
we do not specify a `Previous' for this node.  Then we will get the
following error message:

     In node "Texinfo Mode", should have Previous: Overview

This is because every `Next' pointer should be matched by a `Previous'
(in the node where the `Next' points) which points back.

  `Info-validate' also checks that all menu entries and cross references
point to actual nodes.

  `Info-validate' requires a tag table and does not work with files
that have been split.  (The `texinfo-format-buffer' command
automatically splits large files.)  In order to use `Info-validate' on
a large file, you must run `texinfo-format-buffer' with an argument so
that it does not split the Info file; and you must create a tag table
for the unsplit file.


File: texinfo,  Node: Unsplit,  Next: Tagifying,  Prev: Using Info-validate,  Up: Running Info-Validate

F.6.2 Creating an Unsplit File
------------------------------

You can run `Info-validate' only on a single Info file that has a tag
table.  The command will not work on the indirect subfiles that are
generated when a master file is split.  If you have a large file
(longer than 300,000 bytes or so), you need to run the
`texinfo-format-buffer' or `makeinfo-buffer' command in such a way that
it does not create indirect subfiles.  You will also need to create a
tag table for the Info file.  After you have done this, you can run
`Info-validate' and look for badly referenced nodes.

  The first step is to create an unsplit Info file.  To prevent
`texinfo-format-buffer' from splitting a Texinfo file into smaller Info
files, give a prefix to the `M-x texinfo-format-buffer' command:

     C-u M-x texinfo-format-buffer

or else

     C-u C-c C-e C-b

When you do this, Texinfo will not split the file and will not create a
tag table for it.  


File: texinfo,  Node: Tagifying,  Next: Splitting,  Prev: Unsplit,  Up: Running Info-Validate

F.6.3 Tagifying a File
----------------------

After creating an unsplit Info file, you must create a tag table for
it.  Visit the Info file you wish to tagify and type:

     M-x Info-tagify

(Note the upper case `I' in `Info-tagify'.)  This creates an Info file
with a tag table that you can validate.

  The third step is to validate the Info file:

     M-x Info-validate

(Note the upper case `I' in `Info-validate'.)  In brief, the steps are:

     C-u M-x texinfo-format-buffer
     M-x Info-tagify
     M-x Info-validate

  After you have validated the node structure, you can rerun
`texinfo-format-buffer' in the normal way so it will construct a tag
table and split the file automatically, or you can make the tag table
and split the file manually.


File: texinfo,  Node: Splitting,  Prev: Tagifying,  Up: Running Info-Validate

F.6.4 Splitting a File Manually
-------------------------------

You should split a large file or else let the `texinfo-format-buffer'
or `makeinfo-buffer' command do it for you automatically.  (Generally
you will let one of the formatting commands do this job for you.  *Note
Creating an Info File::.)

  The split-off files are called the indirect subfiles.

  Info files are split to save memory.  With smaller files, Emacs does
not have make such a large buffer to hold the information.

  If an Info file has more than 30 nodes, you should also make a tag
table for it. *Note Using Info-validate::, for information about
creating a tag table.  (Again, tag tables are usually created
automatically by the formatting command; you only need to create a tag
table yourself if you are doing the job manually.  Most likely, you
will do this for a large, unsplit file on which you have run
`Info-validate'.)

  Visit the Info file you wish to tagify and split and type the two
commands:

     M-x Info-tagify
     M-x Info-split

(Note that the `I' in `Info' is upper case.)

  When you use the `Info-split' command, the buffer is modified into a
(small) Info file which lists the indirect subfiles.  This file should
be saved in place of the original visited file.  The indirect subfiles
are written in the same directory the original file is in, with names
generated by appending `-' and a number to the original file name.

  The primary file still functions as an Info file, but it contains just
the tag table and a directory of subfiles.


File: texinfo,  Node: Copying This Manual,  Next: Command and Variable Index,  Prev: Catching Mistakes,  Up: Top

Appendix G Copying This Manual
******************************

* Menu:

* GNU Free Documentation License::  License for copying this manual.


File: texinfo,  Node: GNU Free Documentation License,  Up: Copying This Manual

G.1 GNU Free Documentation License
==================================

                      Version 1.2, November 2002

     Copyright (C) 2000,2001,2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
     51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301, USA

     Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
     of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

  0. PREAMBLE

     The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
     functional and useful document "free" in the sense of freedom: to
     assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it,
     with or without modifying it, either commercially or
     noncommercially.  Secondarily, this License preserves for the
     author and publisher a way to get credit for their work, while not
     being considered responsible for modifications made by others.

     This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative
     works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.
     It complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
     license designed for free software.

     We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for
     free software, because free software needs free documentation: a
     free program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms
     that the software does.  But this License is not limited to
     software manuals; it can be used for any textual work, regardless
     of subject matter or whether it is published as a printed book.
     We recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is
     instruction or reference.

  1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

     This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium,
     that contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it
     can be distributed under the terms of this License.  Such a notice
     grants a world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration,
     to use that work under the conditions stated herein.  The
     "Document", below, refers to any such manual or work.  Any member
     of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you".  You
     accept the license if you copy, modify or distribute the work in a
     way requiring permission under copyright law.

     A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
     Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
     modifications and/or translated into another language.

     A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section
     of the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
     publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall
     subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could
     fall directly within that overall subject.  (Thus, if the Document
     is in part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not
     explain any mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of
     historical connection with the subject or with related matters, or
     of legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position
     regarding them.

     The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose
     titles are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in
     the notice that says that the Document is released under this
     License.  If a section does not fit the above definition of
     Secondary then it is not allowed to be designated as Invariant.
     The Document may contain zero Invariant Sections.  If the Document
     does not identify any Invariant Sections then there are none.

     The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are
     listed, as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice
     that says that the Document is released under this License.  A
     Front-Cover Text may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may
     be at most 25 words.

     A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
     represented in a format whose specification is available to the
     general public, that is suitable for revising the document
     straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images
     composed of pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some
     widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to
     text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of
     formats suitable for input to text formatters.  A copy made in an
     otherwise Transparent file format whose markup, or absence of
     markup, has been arranged to thwart or discourage subsequent
     modification by readers is not Transparent.  An image format is
     not Transparent if used for any substantial amount of text.  A
     copy that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

     Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
     ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format,
     SGML or XML using a publicly available DTD, and
     standard-conforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for
     human modification.  Examples of transparent image formats include
     PNG, XCF and JPG.  Opaque formats include proprietary formats that
     can be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or
     XML for which the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally
     available, and the machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF
     produced by some word processors for output purposes only.

     The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
     plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the
     material this License requires to appear in the title page.  For
     works in formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title
     Page" means the text near the most prominent appearance of the
     work's title, preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

     A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document
     whose title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses
     following text that translates XYZ in another language.  (Here XYZ
     stands for a specific section name mentioned below, such as
     "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".)
     To "Preserve the Title" of such a section when you modify the
     Document means that it remains a section "Entitled XYZ" according
     to this definition.

     The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice
     which states that this License applies to the Document.  These
     Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in
     this License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other
     implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and
     has no effect on the meaning of this License.

  2. VERBATIM COPYING

     You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
     commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
     copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License
     applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you
     add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You
     may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading
     or further copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However,
     you may accept compensation in exchange for copies.  If you
     distribute a large enough number of copies you must also follow
     the conditions in section 3.

     You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above,
     and you may publicly display copies.

  3. COPYING IN QUANTITY

     If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly
     have printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and
     the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must
     enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all
     these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and
     Back-Cover Texts on the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly
     and legibly identify you as the publisher of these copies.  The
     front cover must present the full title with all words of the
     title equally prominent and visible.  You may add other material
     on the covers in addition.  Copying with changes limited to the
     covers, as long as they preserve the title of the Document and
     satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in
     other respects.

     If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
     legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
     reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto
     adjacent pages.

     If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document
     numbering more than 100, you must either include a
     machine-readable Transparent copy along with each Opaque copy, or
     state in or with each Opaque copy a computer-network location from
     which the general network-using public has access to download
     using public-standard network protocols a complete Transparent
     copy of the Document, free of added material.  If you use the
     latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you
     begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that
     this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated
     location until at least one year after the last time you
     distribute an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or
     retailers) of that edition to the public.

     It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of
     the Document well before redistributing any large number of
     copies, to give them a chance to provide you with an updated
     version of the Document.

  4. MODIFICATIONS

     You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document
     under the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you
     release the Modified Version under precisely this License, with
     the Modified Version filling the role of the Document, thus
     licensing distribution and modification of the Modified Version to
     whoever possesses a copy of it.  In addition, you must do these
     things in the Modified Version:

       A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title
          distinct from that of the Document, and from those of
          previous versions (which should, if there were any, be listed
          in the History section of the Document).  You may use the
          same title as a previous version if the original publisher of
          that version gives permission.

       B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or
          entities responsible for authorship of the modifications in
          the Modified Version, together with at least five of the
          principal authors of the Document (all of its principal
          authors, if it has fewer than five), unless they release you
          from this requirement.

       C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
          Modified Version, as the publisher.

       D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

       E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
          adjacent to the other copyright notices.

       F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license
          notice giving the public permission to use the Modified
          Version under the terms of this License, in the form shown in
          the Addendum below.

       G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant
          Sections and required Cover Texts given in the Document's
          license notice.

       H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.

       I. Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title,
          and add to it an item stating at least the title, year, new
          authors, and publisher of the Modified Version as given on
          the Title Page.  If there is no section Entitled "History" in
          the Document, create one stating the title, year, authors,
          and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page,
          then add an item describing the Modified Version as stated in
          the previous sentence.

       J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document
          for public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and
          likewise the network locations given in the Document for
          previous versions it was based on.  These may be placed in
          the "History" section.  You may omit a network location for a
          work that was published at least four years before the
          Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version
          it refers to gives permission.

       K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications",
          Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve in the
          section all the substance and tone of each of the contributor
          acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.

       L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
          unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
          or the equivalent are not considered part of the section
          titles.

       M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements".  Such a section
          may not be included in the Modified Version.

       N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled
          "Endorsements" or to conflict in title with any Invariant
          Section.

       O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.

     If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
     appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no
     material copied from the Document, you may at your option
     designate some or all of these sections as invariant.  To do this,
     add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified
     Version's license notice.  These titles must be distinct from any
     other section titles.

     You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains
     nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
     parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text
     has been approved by an organization as the authoritative
     definition of a standard.

     You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text,
     and a passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end
     of the list of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one
     passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be
     added by (or through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the
     Document already includes a cover text for the same cover,
     previously added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity
     you are acting on behalf of, you may not add another; but you may
     replace the old one, on explicit permission from the previous
     publisher that added the old one.

     The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this
     License give permission to use their names for publicity for or to
     assert or imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

  5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS

     You may combine the Document with other documents released under
     this License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for
     modified versions, provided that you include in the combination
     all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents,
     unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections of your
     combined work in its license notice, and that you preserve all
     their Warranty Disclaimers.

     The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
     multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
     copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name
     but different contents, make the title of each such section unique
     by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the
     original author or publisher of that section if known, or else a
     unique number.  Make the same adjustment to the section titles in
     the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice of the
     combined work.

     In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled
     "History" in the various original documents, forming one section
     Entitled "History"; likewise combine any sections Entitled
     "Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled "Dedications".  You
     must delete all sections Entitled "Endorsements."

  6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

     You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other
     documents released under this License, and replace the individual
     copies of this License in the various documents with a single copy
     that is included in the collection, provided that you follow the
     rules of this License for verbatim copying of each of the
     documents in all other respects.

     You may extract a single document from such a collection, and
     distribute it individually under this License, provided you insert
     a copy of this License into the extracted document, and follow
     this License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of
     that document.

  7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

     A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other
     separate and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of
     a storage or distribution medium, is called an "aggregate" if the
     copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the
     legal rights of the compilation's users beyond what the individual
     works permit.  When the Document is included in an aggregate, this
     License does not apply to the other works in the aggregate which
     are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

     If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
     copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one half
     of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed
     on covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the
     electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic
     form.  Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that bracket
     the whole aggregate.

  8. TRANSLATION

     Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
     distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section
     4.  Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
     permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
     translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
     original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
     translation of this License, and all the license notices in the
     Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also
     include the original English version of this License and the
     original versions of those notices and disclaimers.  In case of a
     disagreement between the translation and the original version of
     this License or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will
     prevail.

     If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements",
     "Dedications", or "History", the requirement (section 4) to
     Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the
     actual title.

  9. TERMINATION

     You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document
     except as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other
     attempt to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is
     void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this
     License.  However, parties who have received copies, or rights,
     from you under this License will not have their licenses
     terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.

 10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

     The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of
     the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
     versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
     differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
     `http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/'.

     Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version
     number.  If the Document specifies that a particular numbered
     version of this License "or any later version" applies to it, you
     have the option of following the terms and conditions either of
     that specified version or of any later version that has been
     published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.  If
     the Document does not specify a version number of this License,
     you may choose any version ever published (not as a draft) by the
     Free Software Foundation.

ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents
====================================================

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and license
notices just after the title page:

       Copyright (C)  YEAR  YOUR NAME.
       Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
       under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
       or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
       with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover
       Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
       Free Documentation License''.

  If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover
Texts, replace the "with...Texts." line with this:

         with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with
         the Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts
         being LIST.

  If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other
combination of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the
situation.

  If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License, to
permit their use in free software.


File: texinfo,  Node: Command and Variable Index,  Next: Concept Index,  Prev: Copying This Manual,  Up: Top

Command and Variable Index
**************************

This is an alphabetical list of all the @-commands, assorted Emacs Lisp
functions, and several variables.  To make the list easier to use, the
commands are listed without their preceding `@'.

 [index ]
* Menu:

* ! (end of sentence):                   Ending a Sentence.   (line   6)
* " (umlaut accent):                     Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* ' (umlaut accent):                     Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* * (force line break):                  Line Breaks.         (line   6)
* , (cedilla accent):                    Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* - (discretionary hyphen):              - and hyphenation.   (line   6)
* .  (end of sentence):                  Ending a Sentence.   (line   6)
* / (allow line break):                  Line Breaks.         (line   6)
* <colon> (suppress end-of-sentence space): Not Ending a Sentence.
                                                              (line  16)
* <newline>:                             Multiple Spaces.     (line   6)
* <space>:                               Multiple Spaces.     (line   6)
* <tab>:                                 Multiple Spaces.     (line   6)
* = (macron accent):                     Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* ? (end of sentence):                   Ending a Sentence.   (line   6)
* @ (literal @):                         Inserting an Atsign. (line   6)
* \ (literal \ in @math):                math.                (line  28)
* \emergencystretch:                     Overfull hboxes.     (line  31)
* \gdef within @tex:                     Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line  29)
* \input (raw TeX startup):              Minimum.             (line  24)
* \mag (raw TeX magnification):          Cropmarks and Magnification.
                                                              (line  24)
* ^ (circumflex accent):                 Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* ` (grave accent):                      Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* aa:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* AA:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* abbr:                                  abbr.                (line   6)
* acronym:                               acronym.             (line   6)
* ae:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* AE:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* afourlatex:                            A4 Paper.            (line  23)
* afourpaper:                            A4 Paper.            (line   6)
* afourwide:                             A4 Paper.            (line  23)
* alias:                                 alias.               (line   6)
* anchor:                                anchor.              (line   6)
* appendix:                              unnumbered & appendix.
                                                              (line   6)
* appendixsec:                           unnumberedsec appendixsec heading.
                                                              (line   6)
* appendixsection:                       unnumberedsec appendixsec heading.
                                                              (line  18)
* appendixsubsec:                        unnumberedsubsec appendixsubsec subheading.
                                                              (line   6)
* appendixsubsubsec:                     subsubsection.       (line   6)
* apply:                                 Sample Function Definition.
                                                              (line  14)
* asis:                                  table.               (line  20)
* author:                                title subtitle author.
                                                              (line   6)
* b (bold font):                         Fonts.               (line  12)
* bullet:                                bullet.              (line   6)
* bye <1>:                               File End.            (line   6)
* bye:                                   Ending a File.       (line   6)
* c (comment):                           Comments.            (line   6)
* caption:                               caption shortcaption.
                                                              (line   6)
* cartouche:                             cartouche.           (line   6)
* center:                                titlefont center sp. (line   6)
* centerchap:                            chapter.             (line  25)
* chapheading:                           majorheading & chapheading.
                                                              (line   6)
* chapter:                               chapter.             (line   6)
* cite:                                  cite.                (line   6)
* code:                                  code.                (line   6)
* columnfractions:                       Multitable Column Widths.
                                                              (line  11)
* comma:                                 Inserting a Comma.   (line   6)
* command:                               command.             (line   6)
* comment:                               Comments.            (line   6)
* contents:                              Contents.            (line   6)
* copying:                               copying.             (line   6)
* copyright <1>:                         copyright symbol.    (line   6)
* copyright:                             copying.             (line  37)
* cropmarks:                             Cropmarks and Magnification.
                                                              (line   6)
* defcodeindex:                          New Indices.         (line   6)
* defcv:                                 Object-Oriented Variables.
                                                              (line  10)
* deffn:                                 Functions Commands.  (line   9)
* deffnx:                                deffnx.              (line   6)
* defindex:                              New Indices.         (line   6)
* definfoenclose:                        definfoenclose.      (line   6)
* defivar:                               Object-Oriented Variables.
                                                              (line  47)
* defmac:                                Functions Commands.  (line  58)
* defmethod:                             Object-Oriented Methods.
                                                              (line  59)
* defop:                                 Object-Oriented Methods.
                                                              (line  11)
* defopt:                                Variables Commands.  (line  56)
* defspec:                               Functions Commands.  (line  63)
* deftp:                                 Data Types.          (line   8)
* deftypecv:                             Object-Oriented Variables.
                                                              (line  28)
* deftypefn:                             Typed Functions.     (line  10)
* deftypefun:                            Typed Functions.     (line  76)
* deftypeivar:                           Object-Oriented Variables.
                                                              (line  63)
* deftypeop:                             Object-Oriented Methods.
                                                              (line  51)
* deftypevar:                            Typed Variables.     (line  40)
* deftypevr:                             Typed Variables.     (line  12)
* defun:                                 Functions Commands.  (line  48)
* defvar:                                Variables Commands.  (line  38)
* defvr:                                 Variables Commands.  (line   8)
* dfn:                                   dfn.                 (line   6)
* dircategory:                           Installing Dir Entries.
                                                              (line  11)
* direntry:                              Installing Dir Entries.
                                                              (line  11)
* display:                               display.             (line   6)
* dmn:                                   dmn.                 (line   6)
* docbook:                               Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line  53)
* documentdescription:                   documentdescription. (line   6)
* documentencoding:                      documentencoding.    (line   6)
* documentlanguage:                      documentlanguage.    (line   6)
* dotaccent:                             Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* dotless:                               Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* dots:                                  dots.                (line   6)
* email:                                 email.               (line   6)
* emph:                                  emph & strong.       (line   6)
* end <1>:                               Quotations and Examples.
                                                              (line  10)
* end:                                   Introducing Lists.   (line  20)
* end titlepage:                         end titlepage.       (line   6)
* enddots:                               dots.                (line   6)
* enumerate:                             enumerate.           (line   6)
* env:                                   env.                 (line   6)
* equiv:                                 Equivalence.         (line   6)
* error:                                 Error Glyph.         (line   6)
* euro:                                  euro.                (line   6)
* evenfooting:                           Custom Headings.     (line  51)
* evenheading:                           Custom Headings.     (line  51)
* everyfooting:                          Custom Headings.     (line  44)
* everyheading:                          Custom Headings.     (line  44)
* example:                               example.             (line   6)
* exampleindent:                         exampleindent.       (line   6)
* exclamdown:                            Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* exdent:                                exdent.              (line   6)
* expansion:                             expansion.           (line   6)
* file:                                  file.                (line   6)
* filll TeX dimension:                   Copyright.           (line  12)
* finalout:                              Overfull hboxes.     (line  46)
* firstparagraphindent:                  firstparagraphindent.
                                                              (line   6)
* float:                                 float.               (line   6)
* flushleft:                             flushleft & flushright.
                                                              (line   6)
* flushright:                            flushleft & flushright.
                                                              (line   6)
* fn-name:                               Def Cmd Continuation Lines.
                                                              (line  19)
* foobar:                                Optional Arguments.  (line  23)
* footnote:                              Footnotes.           (line   6)
* footnotestyle:                         Footnote Styles.     (line  44)
* format:                                format.              (line   6)
* forward-word:                          Def Cmd Template.    (line  35)
* ftable:                                ftable vtable.       (line   6)
* group:                                 group.               (line   6)
* H (Hungarian umlaut accent):           Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* hbox:                                  Overfull hboxes.     (line  14)
* heading:                               unnumberedsec appendixsec heading.
                                                              (line   6)
* headings:                              headings on off.     (line   6)
* headitem:                              Multitable Rows.     (line  12)
* headword:                              definfoenclose.      (line  58)
* html:                                  Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line  45)
* hyphenation:                           - and hyphenation.   (line   6)
* i (italic font):                       Fonts.               (line  15)
* ifclear:                               ifset ifclear.       (line  47)
* ifdocbook <1>:                         Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line  53)
* ifdocbook:                             Conditional Commands.
                                                              (line  14)
* ifhtml <1>:                            Conditional Commands.
                                                              (line  14)
* ifhtml:                                Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line  45)
* ifinfo:                                Conditional Commands.
                                                              (line   9)
* ifnotdocbook:                          Conditional Not Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* ifnothtml:                             Conditional Not Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* ifnotinfo:                             Conditional Not Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* ifnotplaintext:                        Conditional Not Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* ifnottex:                              Conditional Not Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* ifnotxml:                              Conditional Not Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* ifplaintext:                           Conditional Commands.
                                                              (line  14)
* ifset:                                 ifset ifclear.       (line   6)
* iftex:                                 Conditional Commands.
                                                              (line  14)
* ifxml <1>:                             Conditional Commands.
                                                              (line  14)
* ifxml:                                 Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line  49)
* ignore:                                Comments.            (line  19)
* image:                                 Images.              (line   6)
* include:                               Using Include Files. (line   6)
* indent:                                indent.              (line   6)
* indicateurl:                           indicateurl.         (line   6)
* Info-validate:                         Running Info-Validate.
                                                              (line   6)
* inforef:                               inforef.             (line   6)
* insertcopying:                         insertcopying.       (line   6)
* isearch-backward:                      deffnx.              (line  22)
* isearch-forward:                       deffnx.              (line  21)
* item <1>:                              Multitable Rows.     (line   6)
* item <2>:                              itemize.             (line  22)
* item:                                  table.               (line  31)
* itemize:                               itemize.             (line   6)
* itemx:                                 itemx.               (line   6)
* kbd:                                   kbd.                 (line   6)
* kbdinputstyle:                         kbd.                 (line  26)
* key:                                   key.                 (line   6)
* L:                                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* l:                                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* LaTeX:                                 tex.                 (line   6)
* lisp:                                  lisp.                (line   6)
* listoffloats:                          listoffloats.        (line   6)
* lowersections:                         Raise/lower sections.
                                                              (line   6)
* macro:                                 Defining Macros.     (line   6)
* majorheading:                          majorheading & chapheading.
                                                              (line   6)
* makeinfo-buffer:                       makeinfo in Emacs.   (line  16)
* makeinfo-kill-job:                     makeinfo in Emacs.   (line  37)
* makeinfo-recenter-output-buffer:       makeinfo in Emacs.   (line  42)
* makeinfo-region:                       makeinfo in Emacs.   (line  12)
* math:                                  math.                (line   6)
* menu:                                  Menus.               (line   6)
* minus:                                 minus.               (line   6)
* multitable:                            Multi-column Tables. (line   6)
* need:                                  need.                (line   6)
* next-error:                            makeinfo in Emacs.   (line  26)
* node:                                  node.                (line   6)
* noindent:                              noindent.            (line   6)
* novalidate:                            Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  83)
* O:                                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* o:                                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* occur:                                 Using occur.         (line   6)
* occur-mode-goto-occurrence:            Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line  22)
* oddfooting:                            Custom Headings.     (line  51)
* oddheading:                            Custom Headings.     (line  51)
* OE:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* oe:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* option:                                option.              (line   6)
* ordf:                                  Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* ordm:                                  Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* page:                                  page.                (line   6)
* page, within @titlepage:               titlepage.           (line  17)
* pagesizes:                             pagesizes.           (line   6)
* paragraphindent:                       paragraphindent.     (line   6)
* phoo:                                  definfoenclose.      (line  35)
* point:                                 Point Glyph.         (line   6)
* pounds:                                pounds.              (line   6)
* print:                                 Print Glyph.         (line   6)
* printindex:                            Printing Indices & Menus.
                                                              (line  23)
* pxref:                                 pxref.               (line   6)
* questiondown:                          Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* quotation:                             quotation.           (line   6)
* r (roman font):                        Fonts.               (line  18)
* raisesections:                         Raise/lower sections.
                                                              (line   6)
* ref:                                   ref.                 (line   6)
* registeredsymbol:                      registered symbol.   (line   6)
* result:                                result.              (line   6)
* ringaccent:                            Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* rmacro:                                Defining Macros.     (line  44)
* samp:                                  samp.                (line   6)
* sansserif (sans serif font):           Fonts.               (line  22)
* sc (small caps font):                  Smallcaps.           (line   6)
* section:                               section.             (line   6)
* setchapternewpage:                     setchapternewpage.   (line   6)
* setcontentsaftertitlepage:             Contents.            (line  51)
* setfilename:                           setfilename.         (line   6)
* setshortcontentsaftertitlepage:        Contents.            (line  51)
* settitle:                              settitle.            (line   6)
* shortcaption:                          caption shortcaption.
                                                              (line   6)
* shortcontents:                         Contents.            (line   6)
* shorttitlepage:                        titlepage.           (line  46)
* slanted (slanted font):                Fonts.               (line  25)
* smallbook:                             smallbook.           (line   6)
* smalldisplay <1>:                      small.               (line   6)
* smalldisplay:                          display.             (line  17)
* smallexample:                          small.               (line   6)
* smallformat <1>:                       small.               (line   6)
* smallformat:                           format.              (line  15)
* smalllisp:                             small.               (line   6)
* sp (line spacing):                     sp.                  (line   6)
* sp (titlepage line spacing):           titlefont center sp. (line   6)
* ss:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* strong:                                emph & strong.       (line   6)
* subheading:                            unnumberedsubsec appendixsubsec subheading.
                                                              (line   6)
* subsection:                            subsection.          (line   6)
* subsubheading:                         subsubsection.       (line   6)
* subsubsection:                         subsubsection.       (line   6)
* subtitle:                              title subtitle author.
                                                              (line   6)
* summarycontents:                       Contents.            (line   6)
* syncodeindex:                          syncodeindex.        (line   6)
* synindex:                              synindex.            (line   6)
* t (typewriter font):                   Fonts.               (line  28)
* tab:                                   Multitable Rows.     (line   6)
* table:                                 Two-column Tables.   (line   6)
* TeX:                                   tex.                 (line   6)
* tex:                                   Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line  21)
* texinfo-all-menus-update:              Updating Commands.   (line 112)
* texinfo-every-node-update:             Updating Commands.   (line 107)
* texinfo-format-buffer <1>:             Info Formatting.     (line  22)
* texinfo-format-buffer:                 texinfo-format commands.
                                                              (line  23)
* texinfo-format-region <1>:             texinfo-format commands.
                                                              (line  19)
* texinfo-format-region:                 Info Formatting.     (line  13)
* texinfo-indent-menu-description:       Other Updating Commands.
                                                              (line  45)
* texinfo-insert-@code:                  Inserting.           (line  15)
* texinfo-insert-@dfn:                   Inserting.           (line  19)
* texinfo-insert-@end:                   Inserting.           (line  23)
* texinfo-insert-@example:               Inserting.           (line  62)
* texinfo-insert-@item:                  Inserting.           (line  30)
* texinfo-insert-@kbd:                   Inserting.           (line  35)
* texinfo-insert-@node:                  Inserting.           (line  39)
* texinfo-insert-@noindent:              Inserting.           (line  44)
* texinfo-insert-@samp:                  Inserting.           (line  49)
* texinfo-insert-@table:                 Inserting.           (line  53)
* texinfo-insert-@var:                   Inserting.           (line  58)
* texinfo-insert-braces:                 Inserting.           (line  67)
* texinfo-insert-node-lines:             Other Updating Commands.
                                                              (line  10)
* texinfo-make-menu:                     Updating Commands.   (line  93)
* texinfo-master-menu:                   Updating Commands.   (line  55)
* texinfo-multiple-files-update:         texinfo-multiple-files-update.
                                                              (line   6)
* texinfo-multiple-files-update (in brief): Other Updating Commands.
                                                              (line  34)
* texinfo-sequential-node-update:        Other Updating Commands.
                                                              (line  54)
* texinfo-show-structure <1>:            Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line  18)
* texinfo-show-structure:                Using texinfo-show-structure.
                                                              (line   6)
* texinfo-start-menu-description:        Inserting.           (line  94)
* texinfo-tex-buffer:                    Printing.            (line  21)
* texinfo-tex-print:                     Printing.            (line  42)
* texinfo-tex-region:                    Printing.            (line  27)
* texinfo-update-node:                   Updating Commands.   (line  83)
* thischapter:                           Custom Headings.     (line  73)
* thischaptername:                       Custom Headings.     (line  70)
* thisfile:                              Custom Headings.     (line  81)
* thispage:                              Custom Headings.     (line  67)
* thistitle:                             Custom Headings.     (line  77)
* tie (unbreakable interword space):     tie.                 (line   6)
* tieaccent:                             Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* title:                                 title subtitle author.
                                                              (line   6)
* titlefont:                             titlefont center sp. (line   6)
* titlepage:                             titlepage.           (line   6)
* today:                                 Custom Headings.     (line  90)
* top:                                   The Top Node.        (line  13)
* top (@-command):                       makeinfo top command.
                                                              (line   6)
* u (breve accent):                      Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* ubaraccent:                            Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* udotaccent:                            Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* unmacro:                               Defining Macros.     (line  56)
* unnumbered:                            unnumbered & appendix.
                                                              (line   6)
* unnumberedsec:                         unnumberedsec appendixsec heading.
                                                              (line   6)
* unnumberedsubsec:                      unnumberedsubsec appendixsubsec subheading.
                                                              (line   6)
* unnumberedsubsubsec:                   subsubsection.       (line   6)
* up-list:                               Inserting.           (line  72)
* uref:                                  uref.                (line   6)
* v (check accent):                      Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* value:                                 set value.           (line   6)
* var:                                   var.                 (line   6)
* verb:                                  verb.                (line   6)
* verbatim:                              verbatim.            (line   6)
* verbatiminclude:                       verbatiminclude.     (line   6)
* vskip TeX vertical skip:               Copyright.           (line  12)
* vtable:                                ftable vtable.       (line   6)
* w (prevent line break):                w.                   (line   6)
* xml:                                   Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line  49)
* xref:                                  xref.                (line   6)
* { (literal {):                         Inserting Braces.    (line   6)
* } (literal }):                         Inserting Braces.    (line   6)
* ~ (tilde accent):                      Inserting Accents.   (line  17)


File: texinfo,  Node: Concept Index,  Prev: Command and Variable Index,  Up: Top

Concept Index
*************

 [index ]
* Menu:

* !:                                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* $Id:                                   GNU Sample Texts.    (line  21)
* $Id expansion, preventing:             w.                   (line  28)
* (dir) as Up node of Top node:          First Node.          (line  13)
* --commands-in-node-names:              makeinfo options.    (line  34)
* --css-include:                         makeinfo options.    (line  41)
* --delete:                              Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  32)
* --dir-file=NAME:                       Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  38)
* --docbook:                             makeinfo options.    (line  46)
* --enable-encoding <1>:                 documentencoding.    (line  30)
* --enable-encoding:                     makeinfo options.    (line  49)
* --entry=TEXT:                          Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  43)
* --error-limit=LIMIT:                   makeinfo options.    (line  55)
* --fill-column=WIDTH:                   makeinfo options.    (line  61)
* --footnote-style, ignored in HTML output: HTML Translation. (line  13)
* --footnote-style=STYLE:                makeinfo options.    (line  70)
* --force:                               makeinfo options.    (line  81)
* --help <1>:                            makeinfo options.    (line  86)
* --help:                                Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  51)
* --html:                                makeinfo options.    (line  90)
* --ifdocbook:                           makeinfo options.    (line 104)
* --ifhtml:                              makeinfo options.    (line 105)
* --ifinfo:                              makeinfo options.    (line 106)
* --ifplaintext:                         makeinfo options.    (line 107)
* --iftex:                               makeinfo options.    (line 108)
* --ifxml:                               makeinfo options.    (line 109)
* --info-dir=DIR:                        Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  61)
* --info-file=FILE:                      Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  56)
* --item=TEXT:                           Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  65)
* --macro-expand=FILE:                   makeinfo options.    (line 116)
* --no-headers:                          makeinfo options.    (line 124)
* --no-ifdocbook:                        makeinfo options.    (line 139)
* --no-ifhtml:                           makeinfo options.    (line 140)
* --no-ifinfo:                           makeinfo options.    (line 141)
* --no-ifplaintext:                      makeinfo options.    (line 142)
* --no-iftex:                            makeinfo options.    (line 143)
* --no-ifxml:                            makeinfo options.    (line 144)
* --no-number-footnotes:                 makeinfo options.    (line 150)
* --no-number-sections:                  makeinfo options.    (line 155)
* --no-pointer-validate:                 makeinfo options.    (line 167)
* --no-split:                            makeinfo options.    (line 159)
* --no-validate:                         makeinfo options.    (line 167)
* --no-warn:                             makeinfo options.    (line 174)
* --number-sections:                     makeinfo options.    (line 177)
* --output=FILE:                         makeinfo options.    (line 183)
* --paragraph-indent=INDENT:             makeinfo options.    (line 197)
* --plaintext:                           makeinfo options.    (line 124)
* --quiet:                               Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  69)
* --reference-limit=LIMIT:               makeinfo options.    (line 213)
* --remove:                              Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  73)
* --section=SEC:                         Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  77)
* --split-size=NUM:                      makeinfo options.    (line 219)
* --verbose:                             makeinfo options.    (line 226)
* --version <1>:                         makeinfo options.    (line 232)
* --version:                             Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  84)
* --xml:                                 makeinfo options.    (line 235)
* -D DIR:                                Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  61)
* -d NAME:                               Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  38)
* -D VAR:                                makeinfo options.    (line  30)
* -E FILE:                               makeinfo options.    (line 116)
* -e LIMIT:                              makeinfo options.    (line  55)
* -e TEXT:                               Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  43)
* -F:                                    makeinfo options.    (line  81)
* -f WIDTH:                              makeinfo options.    (line  61)
* -h <1>:                                Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  51)
* -h:                                    makeinfo options.    (line  86)
* -I DIR:                                makeinfo options.    (line  96)
* -i FILE:                               Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  56)
* -o FILE:                               makeinfo options.    (line 183)
* -P DIR:                                makeinfo options.    (line 191)
* -p INDENT:                             makeinfo options.    (line 197)
* -r:                                    Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  73)
* -r LIMIT:                              makeinfo options.    (line 213)
* -s SEC:                                Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  77)
* -s STYLE:                              makeinfo options.    (line  70)
* -V <1>:                                makeinfo options.    (line 232)
* -V:                                    Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  84)
* .cshrc initialization file:            Preparing for TeX.   (line   6)
* .profile initialization file:          Preparing for TeX.   (line   6)
* /L:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* /l:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* /o:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* /O:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* 8-bit characters, in HTML cross-references: HTML Xref 8-bit Character Expansion.
                                                              (line   6)
* <abbr> tag:                            abbr.                (line  22)
* <acronym> tag:                         acronym.             (line  19)
* <blockquote> HTML tag:                 quotation.           (line  44)
* <lineannotation> Docbook tag:          Fonts.               (line  35)
* <meta> HTML tag, and charset specification: documentencoding.
                                                              (line  39)
* <meta> HTML tag, and document description: documentdescription.
                                                              (line   6)
* <note> Docbook tag:                    quotation.           (line  44)
* <small> tag:                           Smallcaps.           (line  25)
* <thead> HTML tag:                      Multitable Rows.     (line  12)
* <title> HTML tag:                      settitle.            (line  21)
* <URL: convention, not used:            uref.                (line  71)
* ?:                                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* @ as continuation in definition commands: Def Cmd Continuation Lines.
                                                              (line   6)
* @-command list:                        Command List.        (line   6)
* @-command syntax:                      Command Syntax.      (line   6)
* @-commands:                            Formatting Commands. (line   6)
* @-commands in @node, limited support:  Pointer Validation.  (line  36)
* @-commands in nodename:                Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  23)
* @import specifications, in CSS files:  HTML CSS.            (line  30)
* @include file sample:                  Sample Include File. (line   6)
* @menu parts:                           Menu Parts.          (line   6)
* @node line writing:                    Writing a Node.      (line   6)
* @value in @node lines:                 Pointer Validation.  (line  66)
* @w, for blank items:                   itemize.             (line  10)
* \input source line ignored:            setfilename.         (line  16)
* a:                                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* A4 paper, printing on:                 A4 Paper.            (line   6)
* A5 paper, printing on:                 A4 Paper.            (line   6)
* aa:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* AA:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Abbreviations for keys:                key.                 (line  19)
* Abbreviations, tagging:                abbr.                (line   6)
* Abstract of document:                  documentdescription. (line   6)
* Accents, inserting:                    Inserting Accents.   (line   6)
* Acronyms, tagging:                     acronym.             (line   6)
* Acute accent:                          Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Adding a new Info file:                New Info File.       (line   6)
* ae:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* AE:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Aliases, command:                      alias.               (line   6)
* All-permissive copying license:        All-permissive Copying License.
                                                              (line   6)
* Allow line break:                      Line Breaks.         (line   6)
* Alphabetical @-command list:           Command List.        (line   6)
* Alt attribute for images:              Image Syntax.        (line  36)
* Anchors:                               anchor.              (line   6)
* Another Info directory:                Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line   6)
* Arguments, repeated and optional:      Optional Arguments.  (line   6)
* ASCII text output:                     makeinfo options.    (line 124)
* Aspect ratio of images:                Image Scaling.       (line   6)
* autoexec.bat:                          Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line  70)
* automake, and version info:            GNU Sample Texts.    (line  32)
* Automatic pointer creation with makeinfo: makeinfo Pointer Creation.
                                                              (line   6)
* Automatically insert nodes, menus:     Updating Nodes and Menus.
                                                              (line   6)
* Auxiliary files, avoiding:             Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  83)
* B5 paper, printing on:                 pagesizes.           (line  16)
* Back-end output formats:               Output Formats.      (line   6)
* Backslash in macros:                   Defining Macros.     (line  37)
* Backslash, and macros:                 Invoking Macros.     (line  23)
* Badly referenced nodes:                Running Info-Validate.
                                                              (line   6)
* Bastard title page:                    titlepage.           (line  46)
* Batch formatting for Info:             Batch Formatting.    (line   6)
* Beebe, Nelson:                         Output Formats.      (line  51)
* Beginning a Texinfo file:              Beginning a File.    (line   6)
* Beginning line of a Texinfo file:      First Line.          (line   6)
* Berry, Karl:                           History.             (line   6)
* Big points:                            Image Scaling.       (line  24)
* Black rectangle in hardcopy:           Overfull hboxes.     (line  41)
* Blank lines:                           sp.                  (line   6)
* Blank lines, as paragraph separator:   Conventions.         (line  16)
* Body of a macro:                       Defining Macros.     (line  26)
* Bold font:                             Fonts.               (line  12)
* Bolio:                                 History.             (line  30)
* Book characteristics, printed:         Printed Books.       (line   6)
* Book, printing small:                  smallbook.           (line   6)
* border-pattern:                        Object-Oriented Variables.
                                                              (line  42)
* border-pattern of Window:              Object-Oriented Variables.
                                                              (line  77)
* BoTeX:                                 History.             (line  30)
* Box with rounded corners:              cartouche.           (line   6)
* Box, ugly black in hardcopy:           Overfull hboxes.     (line  41)
* Braces and argument syntax:            Command Syntax.      (line  40)
* Braces, in macro arguments:            Invoking Macros.     (line  38)
* Braces, inserting:                     Inserting Braces.    (line   6)
* Braces, when to use:                   Formatting Commands. (line  50)
* Breaks in a line:                      Line Breaks.         (line   6)
* Breve accent:                          Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Buffer formatting and printing:        Printing.            (line   6)
* Bugs, reporting:                       Reporting Bugs.      (line   6)
* Bullets, inserting:                    Dots Bullets.        (line   6)
* Captions, for floats:                  caption shortcaption.
                                                              (line   6)
* Caron accent:                          Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Cascading Style Sheets, and HTML output: HTML CSS.          (line   6)
* Case in node name:                     Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  42)
* Case, not altering in @code:           code.                (line  19)
* Catching errors with Info formatting:  Debugging with Info. (line   6)
* Catching errors with TeX formatting:   Debugging with TeX.  (line   6)
* Catching mistakes:                     Catching Mistakes.   (line   6)
* Categories, choosing:                  Installing Dir Entries.
                                                              (line  45)
* Caveats for macro usage:               Macro Details.       (line   6)
* Cedilla accent:                        Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Centimeters:                           Image Scaling.       (line  30)
* Chapter structuring:                   Structuring.         (line   6)
* Chapters, formatting one at a time:    Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  83)
* Character set, declaring:              documentencoding.    (line   6)
* Characteristics, printed books or manuals: Printed Books.   (line   6)
* Characters, basic input:               Conventions.         (line   6)
* Characters, invalid in node name:      Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  30)
* Chassell, Robert J.:                   History.             (line   6)
* Check accent:                          Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Checking for badly referenced nodes:   Running Info-Validate.
                                                              (line   6)
* Checklist for bug reports:             Reporting Bugs.      (line  11)
* Ciceros:                               Image Scaling.       (line  39)
* Circumflex accent:                     Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* code, value for @kbdinputstyle:        kbd.                 (line  32)
* Collapsing whitespace around continuations: Def Cmd Continuation Lines.
                                                              (line  31)
* Colon in nodename:                     Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  30)
* Colon, last in INFOPATH:               Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line  80)
* Column widths, defining for multitables: Multitable Column Widths.
                                                              (line   6)
* Combining indices:                     Combining Indices.   (line   6)
* Comma in nodename:                     Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  30)
* Comma, in macro arguments:             Invoking Macros.     (line  38)
* Command aliases:                       alias.               (line   6)
* Command definitions:                   Sample Function Definition.
                                                              (line   6)
* Command names, indicating:             command.             (line   6)
* Command syntax:                        Command Syntax.      (line   6)
* Commands to insert special characters: Atsign Braces Comma. (line   6)
* Commands using raw TeX:                Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Commands, inserting them:              Inserting.           (line   6)
* Commas, inserting:                     Inserting a Comma.   (line   6)
* Comments:                              Comments.            (line   6)
* Comments, in CSS files:                HTML CSS.            (line  36)
* Compile command for formatting:        Compile-Command.     (line   6)
* Compressed files, reading:             Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  22)
* Conditionally visible text:            Conditionals.        (line   6)
* Conditionals, nested:                  Conditional Nesting. (line   6)
* Conditions for copying Texinfo:        Copying Conditions.  (line   6)
* Contents, after title page:            Contents.            (line  51)
* Contents, Table of:                    Contents.            (line   6)
* Contents-like outline of file structure: Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line   6)
* Continuation lines in definition commands: Def Cmd Continuation Lines.
                                                              (line   6)
* Conventions for writing definitions:   Def Cmd Conventions. (line   6)
* Conventions, syntactic:                Conventions.         (line   6)
* Copying conditions:                    Copying Conditions.  (line   6)
* Copying Permissions:                   Document Permissions.
                                                              (line   6)
* Copying software:                      Software Copying Permissions.
                                                              (line   6)
* Copying text, including:               insertcopying.       (line   6)
* Copyright holder for FSF works:        copying.             (line  53)
* Copyright page:                        Copyright.           (line   6)
* Copyright page, for plain text:        Titlepage & Copyright Page.
                                                              (line  16)
* Copyright word, always in English:     copying.             (line  44)
* Correcting mistakes:                   Catching Mistakes.   (line   6)
* cp (concept) index:                    Predefined Indices.  (line  10)
* Create nodes, menus automatically:     Updating Nodes and Menus.
                                                              (line   6)
* Creating an Info file:                 Creating an Info File.
                                                              (line   6)
* Creating an unsplit file:              Unsplit.             (line   6)
* Creating index entries:                Indexing Commands.   (line   6)
* Creating pointers with makeinfo:       makeinfo Pointer Creation.
                                                              (line   6)
* Cropmarks for printing:                Cropmarks and Magnification.
                                                              (line   6)
* Cross reference parts:                 Cross Reference Parts.
                                                              (line   6)
* Cross references:                      Cross References.    (line   6)
* Cross references using @inforef:       inforef.             (line   6)
* Cross references using @pxref:         pxref.               (line   6)
* Cross references using @ref:           ref.                 (line   6)
* Cross references using @xref:          xref.                (line   6)
* Cross-reference targets, arbitrary:    anchor.              (line   6)
* Cross-references, in HTML output:      HTML Xref.           (line   6)
* CSS, and HTML output:                  HTML CSS.            (line   6)
* Custom page sizes:                     pagesizes.           (line   6)
* Customize Emacs package (Development/Docs/Texinfo): Texinfo Mode Printing.
                                                              (line  92)
* Customized highlighting:               definfoenclose.      (line   6)
* Customizing of TeX for Texinfo:        Preparing for TeX.   (line  27)
* CVS $Id:                               GNU Sample Texts.    (line  21)
* Dashes in source:                      Conventions.         (line  41)
* Debugging the Texinfo structure:       Catching Mistakes.   (line   6)
* Debugging with Info formatting:        Debugging with Info. (line   6)
* Debugging with TeX formatting:         Debugging with TeX.  (line   6)
* Default font:                          Fonts.               (line  18)
* Defining indexing entries:             Indexing Commands.   (line   6)
* Defining macros:                       Defining Macros.     (line   6)
* Defining new indices:                  New Indices.         (line   6)
* Defining new Texinfo commands:         Defining New Texinfo Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Definition command headings, continuing: Def Cmd Continuation Lines.
                                                              (line   6)
* Definition commands:                   Definition Commands. (line   6)
* Definition conventions:                Def Cmd Conventions. (line   6)
* Definition lists, typesetting:         table.               (line   6)
* Definition template:                   Def Cmd Template.    (line   6)
* Definitions grouped together:          deffnx.              (line   6)
* Delimiter character, for verbatim:     verb.                (line   6)
* Depth of text area:                    pagesizes.           (line   6)
* Description for menu, start:           Inserting.           (line  94)
* Description of document:               documentdescription. (line   6)
* Details of macro usage:                Macro Details.       (line   6)
* Dido^t points:                         Image Scaling.       (line  36)
* Different cross reference commands:    Cross Reference Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Dimension formatting:                  dmn.                 (line   6)
* Dimensions and image sizes:            Image Scaling.       (line  14)
* Dir categories, choosing:              Installing Dir Entries.
                                                              (line  45)
* dir directory for Info installation:   Installing an Info File.
                                                              (line   6)
* dir file listing:                      New Info File.       (line   6)
* dir file, creating your own:           Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line  91)
* dir files and Info directories:        Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line   6)
* Dir files, compressed:                 Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  22)
* dir, created by install-info:          Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  19)
* Display formatting:                    display.             (line   6)
* Displayed equations:                   math.                (line  33)
* distinct, value for @kbdinputstyle:    kbd.                 (line  32)
* Distorting images:                     Image Scaling.       (line   6)
* Distribution:                          Software Copying Permissions.
                                                              (line   6)
* Docbook output:                        Output Formats.      (line  72)
* Docbook, including raw:                Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Document description:                  documentdescription. (line   6)
* Document input encoding:               documentencoding.    (line   6)
* Document language, declaring:          documentlanguage.    (line   6)
* Document Permissions:                  Document Permissions.
                                                              (line   6)
* Documentation identification:          GNU Sample Texts.    (line  21)
* Dot accent:                            Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Dotless i, j:                          Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Dots, inserting <1>:                   dots.                (line   6)
* Dots, inserting:                       Dots Bullets.        (line   6)
* Double-colon menu entries:             Less Cluttered Menu Entry.
                                                              (line   6)
* DTD, for Texinfo XML:                  Output Formats.      (line  62)
* Dumas, Patrice:                        HTML Xref.           (line  21)
* Dumping a .fmt file:                   Preparing for TeX.   (line  74)
* DVI file:                              Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line   6)
* DVI output:                            Output Formats.      (line  36)
* dvips:                                 Output Formats.      (line  36)
* Ellipsis, inserting:                   Dots Bullets.        (line   6)
* Em dash, compared to minus sign:       minus.               (line   6)
* Em dash, producing:                    Conventions.         (line  41)
* Emacs:                                 Texinfo Mode.        (line   6)
* Emacs shell, format, print from:       Within Emacs.        (line   6)
* Emacs-W3:                              Output Formats.      (line  26)
* Emphasizing text:                      Emphasis.            (line   6)
* Emphasizing text, font for:            emph & strong.       (line   6)
* En dash, producing:                    Conventions.         (line  41)
* Encoding, declaring:                   documentencoding.    (line   6)
* End node footnote style:               Footnote Styles.     (line   9)
* End of header line:                    End of Header.       (line   6)
* End titlepage starts headings:         end titlepage.       (line   6)
* Ending a Sentence:                     Ending a Sentence.   (line   6)
* Ending a Texinfo file:                 Ending a File.       (line   6)
* Entries for an index:                  Indexing Commands.   (line   6)
* Entries, making index:                 Index Entries.       (line   6)
* Enumeration:                           enumerate.           (line   6)
* Environment indentation:               exampleindent.       (line   6)
* Environment variable INFOPATH:         Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line  50)
* Environment variable TEXINFO_OUTPUT_FORMAT: makeinfo options.
                                                              (line 238)
* Environment variable TEXINPUTS:        Preparing for TeX.   (line  37)
* epsf.tex:                              Image Scaling.       (line  49)
* epsf.tex, installing:                  Preparing for TeX.   (line  20)
* Equations, displayed:                  math.                (line  33)
* Equivalence, indicating:               Equivalence.         (line   6)
* Error message, indicating:             Error Glyph.         (line   6)
* Errors, parsing:                       makeinfo in Emacs.   (line  26)
* Es-zet:                                Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* European A4 paper:                     A4 Paper.            (line   6)
* Evaluation glyph:                      result.              (line   6)
* Example beginning of Texinfo file:     Sample Beginning.    (line   6)
* Example indentation:                   exampleindent.       (line   6)
* Example menu:                          Menu Example.        (line   6)
* example, value for @kbdinputstyle:     kbd.                 (line  32)
* Examples in smaller fonts:             small.               (line   6)
* Examples, formatting them:             example.             (line   6)
* Examples, glyphs for:                  Glyphs.              (line   6)
* Expanding macros:                      Invoking Macros.     (line   6)
* Expansion of 8-bit characters in HTML cross-references: HTML Xref 8-bit Character Expansion.
                                                              (line   6)
* Expansion, indicating:                 expansion.           (line   6)
* expansion, of node names in HTML cross-references: HTML Xref Node Name Expansion.
                                                              (line   6)
* Expressions in a program, indicating:  code.                (line  10)
* FDL, GNU Free Documentation License:   GNU Free Documentation License.
                                                              (line   6)
* Feminine ordinal:                      Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* File beginning:                        Beginning a File.    (line   6)
* File ending:                           Ending a File.       (line   6)
* File name collision:                   setfilename.         (line  26)
* File section structure, showing it:    Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line   6)
* Final output:                          Overfull hboxes.     (line   6)
* Finding badly referenced nodes:        Running Info-Validate.
                                                              (line   6)
* Fine-tuning, and hyphenation:          - and hyphenation.   (line   6)
* First line of a Texinfo file:          First Line.          (line   6)
* First node:                            First Node.          (line   6)
* First paragraph, suppressing indentation of: firstparagraphindent.
                                                              (line   6)
* Fixed-width font:                      Fonts.               (line  28)
* Float environment:                     float.               (line   6)
* Floating accents, inserting:           Inserting Accents.   (line   6)
* Floating, not yet implemented:         Floats.              (line  10)
* Floats, in general:                    Floats.              (line   6)
* Floats, list of:                       listoffloats.        (line   6)
* Floats, making unnumbered:             float.               (line  39)
* Floats, numbering of:                  float.               (line  46)
* Flooding:                              pxref.               (line  35)
* fn (function) index:                   Predefined Indices.  (line  13)
* Fonts for indices:                     syncodeindex.        (line  52)
* Fonts for printing, not Info:          Fonts.               (line   6)
* Footings:                              Headings.            (line   6)
* Footnotes:                             Footnotes.           (line   6)
* Force line break:                      Line Breaks.         (line   6)
* Forcing indentation:                   indent.              (line   6)
* Forcing line and page breaks:          Breaks.              (line   6)
* Format a dimension:                    dmn.                 (line   6)
* Format and print hardcopy:             Hardcopy.            (line   6)
* Format and print in Texinfo mode:      Texinfo Mode Printing.
                                                              (line   6)
* Format file, dumping:                  Preparing for TeX.   (line  74)
* Format with the compile command:       Compile-Command.     (line   6)
* Format, print from Emacs shell:        Within Emacs.        (line   6)
* Formats for images:                    Image Syntax.        (line  10)
* Formatting a file for Info:            Creating an Info File.
                                                              (line   6)
* Formatting commands:                   Formatting Commands. (line   6)
* Formatting examples:                   example.             (line   6)
* Formatting for Info:                   Info Formatting.     (line   6)
* Formatting for printing:               Printing.            (line   6)
* Formatting headings and footings:      Headings.            (line   6)
* Formatting requirements:               Requirements Summary.
                                                              (line   6)
* Formatting with tex and texindex:      Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line   6)
* Formulas, mathematical:                math.                (line   6)
* Fox, Brian:                            History.             (line   6)
* Free Documentation License, including entire: GNU Sample Texts.
                                                              (line  51)
* Free Software Directory:               Installing Dir Entries.
                                                              (line  45)
* Frequently used commands, inserting:   Inserting.           (line   6)
* Frontmatter, text in:                  Beginning a File.    (line  15)
* Full texts, GNU:                       GNU Sample Texts.    (line   6)
* Function definitions:                  Sample Function Definition.
                                                              (line   6)
* General syntactic conventions:         Conventions.         (line   6)
* Generating menus with indices:         Printing Indices & Menus.
                                                              (line   6)
* Generating plain text files:           makeinfo options.    (line 124)
* German S:                              Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* GIF images, unsupported due to patents: Image Syntax.       (line  43)
* Global Document Commands:              Global Document Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Globbing:                              Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  31)
* Glyphs:                                Glyphs.              (line   6)
* GNU Emacs:                             Texinfo Mode.        (line   6)
* GNU Emacs shell, format, print from:   Within Emacs.        (line   6)
* GNU Free Documentation License, including entire: GNU Sample Texts.
                                                              (line  51)
* GNU sample texts:                      GNU Sample Texts.    (line   6)
* Going to other Info files' nodes:      Other Info Files.    (line   6)
* Grave accent:                          Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Grave accent, vs. left quote:          Conventions.         (line  35)
* Group (hold text together vertically): group.               (line   6)
* Grouping two definitions together:     deffnx.              (line   6)
* Hacek accent:                          Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Hardcopy, printing it:                 Hardcopy.            (line   6)
* hboxes, overfull:                      Overfull hboxes.     (line   6)
* Header for Texinfo files:              Texinfo File Header. (line   6)
* Header of a Texinfo file:              First Line.          (line   6)
* Heading row, in table:                 Multitable Rows.     (line  12)
* Headings:                              Headings.            (line   6)
* Headings, indentation after:           firstparagraphindent.
                                                              (line   6)
* Headings, page, begin to appear:       end titlepage.       (line   6)
* Height of images:                      Image Scaling.       (line   6)
* Height of text area:                   pagesizes.           (line   6)
* help2man:                              Output Formats.      (line  90)
* Hierarchical documents, and menus:     Menu Location.       (line  16)
* Highlighting text:                     Indicating.          (line   6)
* Highlighting, customized:              definfoenclose.      (line   6)
* Hints:                                 Tips.                (line   8)
* History of Texinfo:                    History.             (line  24)
* Holder of copyright for FSF works:     copying.             (line  53)
* Holding text together vertically:      group.               (line   6)
* href, producing HTML:                  uref.                (line   6)
* HTML cross-reference 8-bit character expansion: HTML Xref 8-bit Character Expansion.
                                                              (line   6)
* HTML cross-reference command expansion: HTML Xref Command Expansion.
                                                              (line   6)
* HTML cross-reference link basics:      HTML Xref Link Basics.
                                                              (line   6)
* HTML cross-reference mismatch:         HTML Xref Mismatch.  (line   6)
* HTML cross-reference node name expansion: HTML Xref Node Name Expansion.
                                                              (line   6)
* HTML cross-references:                 HTML Xref.           (line   6)
* HTML output <1>:                       Generating HTML.     (line   6)
* HTML output:                           Output Formats.      (line  26)
* HTML output, and encodings:            documentencoding.    (line  39)
* HTML output, browser compatibility of: HTML Translation.    (line  22)
* HTML output, split:                    HTML Splitting.      (line   6)
* HTML, and CSS:                         HTML CSS.            (line   6)
* HTML, including raw:                   Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* http-equiv, and charset specification: documentencoding.    (line  39)
* Hungarian umlaut accent:               Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Hurricanes:                            ref.                 (line  12)
* Hyphen, compared to minus:             minus.               (line   6)
* Hyphenation patterns, language-dependent: documentlanguage. (line  18)
* Hyphenation, helping TeX do:           - and hyphenation.   (line   6)
* Hyphenation, preventing:               w.                   (line  24)
* Hyphens in source, two or three in a row: Conventions.      (line  41)
* i (dotless i):                         Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Identification of documentation:       GNU Sample Texts.    (line  21)
* If text conditionally visible:         Conditionals.        (line   6)
* Ignored before @setfilename:           setfilename.         (line  16)
* Ignored text:                          Comments.            (line  19)
* Image formats:                         Image Syntax.        (line  10)
* Images, alternate text for:            Image Syntax.        (line  36)
* Images, inserting:                     Images.              (line   6)
* Images, scaling:                       Image Scaling.       (line   6)
* Inches:                                Image Scaling.       (line  27)
* Include file sample:                   Sample Include File. (line   6)
* Include files:                         Include Files.       (line   6)
* Include files requirements:            Include Files Requirements.
                                                              (line   6)
* Include files, and section levels:     Raise/lower sections.
                                                              (line  16)
* Including a file verbatim:             verbatiminclude.     (line   6)
* Including permissions text:            insertcopying.       (line   6)
* Indentation undoing:                   exdent.              (line   6)
* Indentation, forcing:                  indent.              (line   6)
* Indentation, omitting:                 noindent.            (line   6)
* Indenting environments:                exampleindent.       (line   6)
* Indenting paragraphs, control of:      paragraphindent.     (line   6)
* Indenting, suppressing of first paragraph: firstparagraphindent.
                                                              (line   6)
* Index entries:                         Indexing Commands.   (line   6)
* Index entries, making:                 Index Entries.       (line   6)
* Index entry writing:                   Indexing Commands.   (line  27)
* Index file names:                      Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  23)
* Index font types:                      Indexing Commands.   (line  48)
* Indexing table entries automatically:  ftable vtable.       (line   6)
* Indicating commands, definitions, etc.: Indicating.         (line   6)
* Indicating evaluation:                 result.              (line   6)
* Indices:                               Indices.             (line   6)
* Indices, combining them:               Combining Indices.   (line   6)
* Indices, defining new:                 New Indices.         (line   6)
* Indices, printing and menus:           Printing Indices & Menus.
                                                              (line   6)
* Indices, sorting:                      Hardcopy.            (line   6)
* Indices, two letter names:             syncodeindex.        (line  17)
* Indirect subfiles:                     Tag and Split Files. (line  11)
* Info batch formatting:                 Batch Formatting.    (line   6)
* Info file installation:                Installing an Info File.
                                                              (line   6)
* Info file name, choosing:              setfilename.         (line  26)
* Info file, listing a new:              New Info File.       (line   6)
* Info file, splitting manually:         Splitting.           (line   6)
* Info files:                            Info Files.          (line   6)
* Info format, and menus:                Menu Location.       (line  10)
* Info formatting:                       Info Formatting.     (line   6)
* Info installed in another directory:   Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line   6)
* Info output:                           Output Formats.      (line  10)
* Info output, and encoding:             documentencoding.    (line  30)
* Info validating a large file:          Using Info-validate. (line   6)
* Info, creating an online file:         Creating an Info File.
                                                              (line   6)
* Info-directory-list:                   Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line  37)
* Info; other files' nodes:              Other Info Files.    (line   6)
* INFOPATH:                              Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line  50)
* Initialization file for TeX input:     Preparing for TeX.   (line   6)
* Input encoding, declaring:             documentencoding.    (line   6)
* Insert nodes, menus automatically:     Updating Nodes and Menus.
                                                              (line   6)
* Inserting @ (literal @):               Inserting an Atsign. (line   6)
* Inserting accents:                     Inserting Accents.   (line   6)
* Inserting dots <1>:                    Dots Bullets.        (line   6)
* Inserting dots:                        dots.                (line   6)
* Inserting ellipsis:                    Dots Bullets.        (line   6)
* Inserting frequently used commands:    Inserting.           (line   6)
* Inserting indentation:                 indent.              (line   6)
* Inserting space:                       Inserting Space.     (line   6)
* Inserting special characters and symbols: Insertions.       (line   6)
* INSTALL file, generating:              makeinfo options.    (line 124)
* install-info:                          Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line   6)
* Installing an Info file:               Installing an Info File.
                                                              (line   6)
* Installing Info in another directory:  Other Info Directories.
                                                              (line   6)
* Internationalization:                  Internationalization.
                                                              (line   6)
* Introduction to Texinfo:               Using Texinfo.       (line   6)
* Introduction, as part of file:         Software Copying Permissions.
                                                              (line  16)
* Invalid characters in node names:      Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  30)
* Invoking macros:                       Invoking Macros.     (line   6)
* Invoking nodes, including in dir file: Installing Dir Entries.
                                                              (line  62)
* ISO 639 codes:                         documentlanguage.    (line  22)
* ISO 8859-15:                           euro.                (line  18)
* Italic font:                           Fonts.               (line  15)
* Itemization:                           itemize.             (line   6)
* j (dotless j):                         Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* JPG image format:                      Image Syntax.        (line  43)
* Keyboard input:                        kbd.                 (line   6)
* Keys, recommended names:               key.                 (line  19)
* Keyword expansion, preventing:         w.                   (line  28)
* Keywords, indicating:                  code.                (line  10)
* Knuth, Donald:                         Printed Books.       (line   6)
* ky (keystroke) index:                  Predefined Indices.  (line  17)
* Language codes:                        documentlanguage.    (line  22)
* Language, declaring:                   documentlanguage.    (line   6)
* Larger or smaller pages:               Cropmarks and Magnification.
                                                              (line  24)
* LaTeX, processing with texi2dvi:       Format with texi2dvi.
                                                              (line  37)
* Latin 9:                               euro.                (line  18)
* Legal paper, printing on:              pagesizes.           (line  16)
* Length of file names:                  setfilename.         (line  26)
* Less cluttered menu entry:             Less Cluttered Menu Entry.
                                                              (line   6)
* License agreement:                     Software Copying Permissions.
                                                              (line   6)
* License for all-permissive copying:    All-permissive Copying License.
                                                              (line   6)
* License for verbatim copying:          Verbatim Copying License.
                                                              (line   6)
* Line breaks <1>:                       Line Breaks.         (line   6)
* Line breaks:                           Breaks.              (line   6)
* Line breaks, preventing:               w.                   (line   6)
* Line length, column widths as fraction of: Multitable Column Widths.
                                                              (line  11)
* Line spacing:                          sp.                  (line   6)
* Lisp example:                          lisp.                (line   6)
* Lisp examples in smaller fonts:        small.               (line   6)
* List of  @-commands:                   Command List.        (line   6)
* List of floats:                        listoffloats.        (line   6)
* Listing a new Info file:               New Info File.       (line   6)
* Lists and tables, making:              Lists and Tables.    (line   6)
* Local variables:                       Compile-Command.     (line   6)
* Local Variables: section, for encoding: documentencoding.   (line  30)
* Location of menus:                     Menu Location.       (line   6)
* Looking for badly referenced nodes:    Running Info-Validate.
                                                              (line   6)
* Lowering and raising sections:         Raise/lower sections.
                                                              (line   6)
* lpr (DVI print command):               Print with lpr.      (line   6)
* lpr-d, replacements on MS-DOS/MS-Windows: Print with lpr.   (line  27)
* Lynx:                                  Output Formats.      (line  26)
* Macro definitions <1>:                 Sample Function Definition.
                                                              (line   6)
* Macro definitions:                     Defining Macros.     (line   6)
* Macro details:                         Macro Details.       (line   6)
* Macro expansion, indicating:           expansion.           (line   6)
* Macro invocation:                      Invoking Macros.     (line   6)
* Macro names, valid characters in:      Defining Macros.     (line  16)
* Macron accent:                         Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Macros:                                Defining New Texinfo Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Macros in definition commands:         Def Cmd Template.    (line  66)
* Macros, undefining:                    Defining Macros.     (line  56)
* Magnified printing:                    Cropmarks and Magnification.
                                                              (line  24)
* Mailto link:                           email.               (line  10)
* makeinfo:                              Invoking makeinfo.   (line   6)
* makeinfo inside Emacs:                 makeinfo in Emacs.   (line   6)
* makeinfo options:                      makeinfo options.    (line   6)
* Making a printed manual:               Hardcopy.            (line   6)
* Making a tag table automatically:      Tag and Split Files. (line   6)
* Making a tag table manually:           Unsplit.             (line  26)
* Making cross references:               Cross References.    (line   6)
* Making line and page breaks:           Breaks.              (line   6)
* Making lists and tables:               Lists and Tables.    (line   6)
* Man page output, not supported:        Output Formats.      (line  80)
* Man page, reference to:                uref.                (line  20)
* Manual characteristics, printed:       Printed Books.       (line   6)
* Margins on page, not controllable:     pagesizes.           (line  20)
* Marking text within a paragraph:       Marking Text.        (line   6)
* Marking words and phrases:             Marking Text.        (line   6)
* Masculine ordinal:                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Master menu:                           Master Menu Parts.   (line   6)
* Mathematical expressions <1>:          Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line  33)
* Mathematical expressions:              math.                (line   6)
* Menu description, start:               Inserting.           (line  94)
* Menu entries with two colons:          Less Cluttered Menu Entry.
                                                              (line   6)
* Menu example:                          Menu Example.        (line   6)
* Menu location:                         Menu Location.       (line   6)
* Menu parts:                            Menu Parts.          (line   6)
* Menu writing:                          Writing a Menu.      (line   6)
* Menu, master:                          Master Menu Parts.   (line   6)
* Menus:                                 Menus.               (line   6)
* Menus generated with indices:          Printing Indices & Menus.
                                                              (line   6)
* Menus, omitting:                       makeinfo options.    (line 124)
* META key:                              key.                 (line  53)
* Meta-syntactic chars for arguments:    Optional Arguments.  (line   6)
* Methods, object-oriented:              Object-Oriented Methods.
                                                              (line   6)
* Millimeters:                           Image Scaling.       (line  33)
* Minimal requirements for formatting:   Requirements Summary.
                                                              (line   6)
* Minimal Texinfo file (requirements):   Minimum.             (line   6)
* Mismatched HTML cross-reference source and target: HTML Xref Mismatch.
                                                              (line   6)
* Mistakes, catching:                    Catching Mistakes.   (line   6)
* Mode, using Texinfo:                   Texinfo Mode.        (line   6)
* Monospace font:                        Fonts.               (line  28)
* Mozilla:                               Output Formats.      (line  26)
* Multiple dashes in source:             Conventions.         (line  41)
* Multiple spaces:                       Multiple Spaces.     (line   6)
* Multitable column widths:              Multitable Column Widths.
                                                              (line   6)
* Multitable rows:                       Multitable Rows.     (line   6)
* Must have in Texinfo file:             Minimum.             (line   6)
* Mutually recursive macros:             Defining Macros.     (line  26)
* Names for indices:                     syncodeindex.        (line  17)
* Names of index files:                  Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  23)
* Names of macros, valid characters of:  Defining Macros.     (line  16)
* Names recommended for keys:            key.                 (line  19)
* Naming a `Top' Node in references:     Top Node Naming.     (line   6)
* NASA, as acronym:                      acronym.             (line   6)
* Navigation bar, in HTML output:        HTML Translation.    (line  16)
* Navigation links, omitting:            makeinfo options.    (line 130)
* Need space at page bottom:             need.                (line   6)
* Nesting conditionals:                  Conditional Nesting. (line   6)
* New index defining:                    New Indices.         (line   6)
* New Info file, listing it in dir file: New Info File.       (line   6)
* New Texinfo commands, defining:        Defining New Texinfo Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Newlines, as blank lines:              Conventions.         (line  16)
* Next node of Top node:                 First Node.          (line  30)
* Node line requirements:                Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line   6)
* Node line writing:                     Writing a Node.      (line   6)
* node name expansion, in HTML cross-references: HTML Xref Node Name Expansion.
                                                              (line   6)
* Node name must be unique:              Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line   8)
* Node name, should not contain @-commands: Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  23)
* Node names, choosing:                  Node Names.          (line   6)
* Node names, invalid characters in:     Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  30)
* Node separators, omitting:             makeinfo options.    (line 124)
* Node, `Top':                           The Top Node.        (line   6)
* Node, defined:                         node.                (line   6)
* Nodes in other Info files:             Other Info Files.    (line   6)
* Nodes, catching mistakes:              Catching Mistakes.   (line   6)
* Nodes, checking for badly referenced:  Running Info-Validate.
                                                              (line   6)
* Non-breakable space, fixed:            w.                   (line   9)
* Non-breakable space, variable:         tie.                 (line   6)
* Not ending a sentence:                 Not Ending a Sentence.
                                                              (line   6)
* Numbering of floats:                   float.               (line  46)
* o:                                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* O'Dea, Brendan:                        Output Formats.      (line  90)
* Object-oriented programming:           Abstract Objects.    (line   6)
* Oblique font:                          Fonts.               (line  25)
* Obtaining TeX:                         Obtaining TeX.       (line   6)
* Occurrences, listing with @occur:      Using occur.         (line   6)
* oe:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* OE:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Omitting indentation:                  noindent.            (line   6)
* Optional and repeated arguments:       Optional Arguments.  (line   6)
* Options for makeinfo:                  makeinfo options.    (line   6)
* Ordinals, Romance:                     Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Ordinary TeX commands, using:          Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Other Info files' nodes:               Other Info Files.    (line   6)
* Outline of file structure, showing it: Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line   6)
* Output file splitting:                 makeinfo options.    (line 159)
* Output formats:                        Output Formats.      (line   6)
* Output formats, supporting more:       Output Formats.      (line  97)
* Overfull hboxes:                       Overfull hboxes.     (line   6)
* Overview of Texinfo:                   Overview.            (line   6)
* Owner of copyright for FSF works:      copying.             (line  53)
* Page breaks <1>:                       Breaks.              (line  11)
* Page breaks:                           page.                (line   6)
* Page delimiter in Texinfo mode:        Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line  40)
* Page headings:                         Headings.            (line   6)
* Page numbering:                        Headings.            (line   6)
* Page sizes for books:                  smallbook.           (line   6)
* Page sizes, customized:                pagesizes.           (line   6)
* page-delimiter:                        Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line  40)
* Pages, starting odd:                   setchapternewpage.   (line   6)
* Paper size, A4:                        A4 Paper.            (line   6)
* Paragraph indentation control:         paragraphindent.     (line   6)
* Paragraph separator:                   Conventions.         (line  16)
* Paragraph, marking text within:        Marking Text.        (line   6)
* Parameters to macros:                  Defining Macros.     (line  32)
* Parentheses in nodename:               Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  30)
* Parsing errors:                        makeinfo in Emacs.   (line  26)
* Part of file formatting and printing:  Printing.            (line   6)
* Parts of a cross reference:            Cross Reference Parts.
                                                              (line   6)
* Parts of a master menu:                Master Menu Parts.   (line   6)
* Parts of a menu:                       Menu Parts.          (line   6)
* Patches, contributing:                 Reporting Bugs.      (line  30)
* PDF output <1>:                        PDF Output.          (line   6)
* PDF output:                            Output Formats.      (line  51)
* pdfcolor.tex, installing:              Preparing for TeX.   (line  24)
* pdftex <1>:                            Output Formats.      (line  51)
* pdftex:                                PDF Output.          (line   6)
* pdftex, and images:                    Image Syntax.        (line  15)
* Period in nodename:                    Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  30)
* Periods, inserting:                    Not Ending a Sentence.
                                                              (line   6)
* Permissions text, including:           insertcopying.       (line   6)
* Permissions, printed:                  Copyright.           (line   6)
* pg (program) index:                    Predefined Indices.  (line  20)
* Picas:                                 Image Scaling.       (line  21)
* Pictures, inserting:                   Images.              (line   6)
* Pinard, Franc,ois:                     History.             (line  14)
* Plain TeX:                             Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Plain text output <1>:                 makeinfo options.    (line 124)
* Plain text output:                     Output Formats.      (line  21)
* PNG image format:                      Image Syntax.        (line  43)
* Point, indicating in a buffer:         Point Glyph.         (line   6)
* Pointer creation with makeinfo:        makeinfo Pointer Creation.
                                                              (line   6)
* Pointer validation with makeinfo:      Pointer Validation.  (line   6)
* Pointer validation, suppressing <1>:   makeinfo options.    (line 167)
* Pointer validation, suppressing:       Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  83)
* Points (dimension):                    Image Scaling.       (line  18)
* Predefined names for indices:          syncodeindex.        (line  17)
* Preparing for TeX:                     Preparing for TeX.   (line   6)
* Preventing first paragraph indentation: firstparagraphindent.
                                                              (line   6)
* Preventing line and page breaks:       Breaks.              (line   6)
* Previous node of Top node:             First Node.          (line  24)
* Print and format in Texinfo mode:      Texinfo Mode Printing.
                                                              (line   6)
* Print, format from Emacs shell:        Within Emacs.        (line   6)
* Printed book and manual characteristics: Printed Books.     (line   6)
* Printed output, indicating:            Print Glyph.         (line   6)
* Printed permissions:                   Copyright.           (line   6)
* Printing a region or buffer:           Printing.            (line   6)
* Printing an index:                     Printing Indices & Menus.
                                                              (line   6)
* Printing cropmarks:                    Cropmarks and Magnification.
                                                              (line   6)
* Printing DVI files, on MS-DOS/MS-Windows: Print with lpr.   (line  27)
* Printing hardcopy:                     Hardcopy.            (line   6)
* Problems, catching:                    Catching Mistakes.   (line   6)
* Program names, indicating:             command.             (line   6)
* Prototype row, column widths defined by: Multitable Column Widths.
                                                              (line  22)
* Quotation characters (`'), in source:  Conventions.         (line  24)
* Quotations:                            quotation.           (line   6)
* Ragged left:                           flushleft & flushright.
                                                              (line   6)
* Ragged right:                          flushleft & flushright.
                                                              (line   6)
* Raising and lowering sections:         Raise/lower sections.
                                                              (line   6)
* Raw formatter commands:                Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* RCS $Id:                               GNU Sample Texts.    (line  21)
* Recommended names for keys:            key.                 (line  19)
* Rectangle, black in hardcopy:          Overfull hboxes.     (line  41)
* Recursion, mutual:                     Defining Macros.     (line  26)
* Recursive macro invocations:           Defining Macros.     (line  44)
* Reference to @-commands:               Command List.        (line   6)
* References:                            Cross References.    (line   6)
* References using @inforef:             inforef.             (line   6)
* References using @pxref:               pxref.               (line   6)
* References using @ref:                 ref.                 (line   6)
* References using @xref:                xref.                (line   6)
* Referring to other Info files:         Other Info Files.    (line   6)
* Region formatting and printing:        Printing.            (line   6)
* Region printing in Texinfo mode:       Texinfo Mode Printing.
                                                              (line   6)
* Reid, Brian:                           History.             (line  24)
* Repeated and optional arguments:       Optional Arguments.  (line   6)
* Reporting bugs:                        Reporting Bugs.      (line   6)
* Required in Texinfo file:              Minimum.             (line   6)
* Requirements for formatting:           Requirements Summary.
                                                              (line   6)
* Requirements for include files:        Include Files Requirements.
                                                              (line   6)
* Requirements for updating commands:    Updating Requirements.
                                                              (line   6)
* Reserved words, indicating:            code.                (line  10)
* Restrictions on node names:            Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line   6)
* Result of an expression:               result.              (line   6)
* ridt.eps:                              Image Scaling.       (line  44)
* Ring accent:                           Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Roman font:                            Fonts.               (line  18)
* Romance ordinals:                      Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Rounded rectangles, around examples:   cartouche.           (line   6)
* Rows, of a multitable:                 Multitable Rows.     (line   6)
* Running an Info formatter:             Info Formatting.     (line   6)
* Running Info-validate:                 Using Info-validate. (line   6)
* Running macros:                        Invoking Macros.     (line   6)
* Running makeinfo in Emacs:             makeinfo in Emacs.   (line   6)
* Sample @include file:                  Sample Include File. (line   6)
* Sample function definition:            Sample Function Definition.
                                                              (line   6)
* Sample Texinfo file, no comments:      Short Sample Texinfo File.
                                                              (line   6)
* Sample Texinfo file, with comments:    Short Sample.        (line   6)
* Sample Texinfo files:                  Sample Texinfo Files.
                                                              (line   6)
* Sample texts, GNU:                     GNU Sample Texts.    (line   6)
* Sans serif font:                       Fonts.               (line  22)
* Scaled points:                         Image Scaling.       (line  42)
* Scaling images:                        Image Scaling.       (line   6)
* Schwab, Andreas:                       History.             (line  14)
* Scribe:                                History.             (line  24)
* Sea surges:                            ref.                 (line  27)
* Section structure of a file, showing it: Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line   6)
* Sections, raising and lowering:        Raise/lower sections.
                                                              (line   6)
* Sentence ending punctuation:           Ending a Sentence.   (line   6)
* Sentence non-ending punctuation:       Not Ending a Sentence.
                                                              (line   6)
* Separate footnote style:               Footnote Styles.     (line  20)
* SGML-tools output format:              Output Formats.      (line  97)
* Sharp S:                               Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Shell formatting with tex and texindex: Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line   6)
* Shell printing, on MS-DOS/MS-Windows:  Print with lpr.      (line  27)
* Shell, format, print from:             Within Emacs.        (line   6)
* Shell, running makeinfo in:            makeinfo in Emacs.   (line   6)
* Short captions, for lists of floats:   caption shortcaption.
                                                              (line   6)
* Short table of contents:               Contents.            (line   6)
* Showing the section structure of a file: Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line   6)
* Showing the structure of a file:       Using texinfo-show-structure.
                                                              (line   6)
* Shrubbery:                             ifset ifclear.       (line  21)
* Site-wide Texinfo configuration file:  Preparing for TeX.   (line  27)
* Size of printed book:                  smallbook.           (line   6)
* Slanted font:                          Fonts.               (line  25)
* Slanted typewriter font, for @kbd:     kbd.                 (line  15)
* Small book size:                       smallbook.           (line   6)
* Small caps font:                       Smallcaps.           (line   6)
* Small examples:                        small.               (line   6)
* Software copying permissions:          Software Copying Permissions.
                                                              (line   6)
* Sorting indices:                       Hardcopy.            (line   6)
* Source file format:                    Using Texinfo.       (line  19)
* Source files, characters used:         Conventions.         (line   9)
* Space, inserting horizontal:           Multiple Spaces.     (line   6)
* Space, inserting vertical:             sp.                  (line   6)
* Spaces in macros:                      Defining Macros.     (line  40)
* Spaces in node name:                   Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  44)
* Spaces, in menus:                      Writing a Menu.      (line  25)
* Spacing, inserting:                    Inserting Space.     (line   6)
* Special characters, inserting:         Atsign Braces Comma. (line   6)
* Special displays:                      Special Displays.    (line   6)
* Special insertions:                    Insertions.          (line   6)
* Special typesetting commands:          Dots Bullets.        (line   6)
* Specifying index entries:              Indexing Commands.   (line   6)
* Split HTML output:                     HTML Splitting.      (line   6)
* Splitting an Info file manually:       Splitting.           (line   6)
* Splitting of output files:             makeinfo options.    (line 159)
* ss:                                    Inserting Accents.   (line  37)
* Stallman, Richard M.:                  History.             (line   6)
* Start of header line:                  Start of Header.     (line   6)
* Starting chapters:                     setchapternewpage.   (line   6)
* Structure of a file, showing it:       Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line   6)
* Structure, catching mistakes in:       Catching Mistakes.   (line   6)
* Structuring of chapters:               Structuring.         (line   6)
* Subsection-like commands:              unnumberedsubsec appendixsubsec subheading.
                                                              (line   6)
* Subsub commands:                       subsubsection.       (line   6)
* Suggestions for Texinfo, making:       Reporting Bugs.      (line   6)
* Summary of document:                   documentdescription. (line   6)
* Suppressing first paragraph indentation: firstparagraphindent.
                                                              (line   6)
* Suppressing indentation:               noindent.            (line   6)
* Syntactic conventions:                 Conventions.         (line   6)
* Syntactic tokens, indicating:          code.                (line   6)
* Syntax, of @-commands:                 Command Syntax.      (line   6)
* Syntax, optional & repeated arguments: Optional Arguments.  (line   6)
* Table of contents:                     Contents.            (line   6)
* Table of contents, after title page:   Contents.            (line  51)
* Table of contents, for floats:         listoffloats.        (line   6)
* Tables and lists, making:              Lists and Tables.    (line   6)
* Tables with indexes:                   ftable vtable.       (line   6)
* Tables, making multi-column:           Multi-column Tables. (line   6)
* Tables, making two-column:             Two-column Tables.   (line   6)
* Tabs; don't use!:                      Conventions.         (line  51)
* Tag table, making automatically:       Tag and Split Files. (line   6)
* Tag table, making manually:            Unsplit.             (line  26)
* Targets for cross-references, arbitrary: anchor.            (line   6)
* Template for a definition:             Def Cmd Template.    (line   6)
* TeX commands, using ordinary:          Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* TeX index sorting:                     Hardcopy.            (line   6)
* TeX input initialization:              Preparing for TeX.   (line   6)
* TeX, how to obtain:                    Obtaining TeX.       (line   6)
* texi2dvi:                              Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  75)
* texi2dvi (shell script):               Format with texi2dvi.
                                                              (line   6)
* texi2roff, unsupported software:       Printed Books.       (line  59)
* texindex <1>:                          Hardcopy.            (line   6)
* texindex:                              Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  16)
* Texinfo commands, defining new:        Defining New Texinfo Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Texinfo file beginning:                Beginning a File.    (line   6)
* Texinfo file ending:                   Ending a File.       (line   6)
* Texinfo file header:                   Texinfo File Header. (line   6)
* Texinfo file minimum:                  Minimum.             (line   6)
* Texinfo file section structure, showing it: Showing the Structure.
                                                              (line   6)
* Texinfo history:                       History.             (line  24)
* Texinfo mode:                          Texinfo Mode.        (line   6)
* Texinfo overview:                      Overview.            (line   6)
* Texinfo printed book characteristics:  Printed Books.       (line   6)
* Texinfo requires @setfilename:         setfilename.         (line   6)
* Texinfo, introduction to:              Using Texinfo.       (line   6)
* texinfo.cnf:                           setfilename.         (line  43)
* texinfo.cnf installation:              Preparing for TeX.   (line  27)
* texinfo.dtd:                           Output Formats.      (line  62)
* texinfo.tex, installing:               Preparing for TeX.   (line  13)
* TEXINFO_OUTPUT_FORMAT:                 makeinfo options.    (line 238)
* TEXINPUTS:                             Preparing for TeX.   (line  37)
* Text width and height:                 pagesizes.           (line   6)
* Text, conditionally visible:           Conditionals.        (line   6)
* Text, marking up:                      Marking Text.        (line   6)
* Thin space between number, dimension:  dmn.                 (line   6)
* Tie-after accent:                      Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Tied space:                            tie.                 (line   6)
* Tilde accent:                          Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* time-stamp.el:                         GNU Sample Texts.    (line  32)
* Tips:                                  Tips.                (line   8)
* Title page:                            titlepage.           (line   6)
* Title page, bastard:                   titlepage.           (line  46)
* Title page, for plain text:            Titlepage & Copyright Page.
                                                              (line  16)
* Titlepage end starts headings:         end titlepage.       (line   6)
* Top node:                              The Top Node.        (line   6)
* Top node example:                      Top Node Example.    (line   6)
* Top node is first:                     First Node.          (line   6)
* Top node naming for references:        Top Node Naming.     (line   6)
* tp (data type) index:                  Predefined Indices.  (line  23)
* Tree structuring:                      Tree Structuring.    (line   6)
* Two `First' Lines for @deffn:          deffnx.              (line   6)
* Two letter names for indices:          syncodeindex.        (line  17)
* Two named items for @table:            itemx.               (line   6)
* Two part menu entry:                   Less Cluttered Menu Entry.
                                                              (line   6)
* txi-CC.tex:                            documentlanguage.    (line  13)
* Typesetting commands for dots, etc.:   Dots Bullets.        (line   6)
* Typewriter font:                       Fonts.               (line  28)
* Ugly black rectangles in hardcopy:     Overfull hboxes.     (line  41)
* Umlaut accent:                         Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Unbreakable space, fixed:              w.                   (line   9)
* Unbreakable space, variable:           tie.                 (line   6)
* Uncluttered menu entry:                Less Cluttered Menu Entry.
                                                              (line   6)
* Undefining macros:                     Defining Macros.     (line  56)
* Underbar accent:                       Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Underdot accent:                       Inserting Accents.   (line  17)
* Unicode quotation characters:          Conventions.         (line  35)
* Uniform resource locator, indicating:  indicateurl.         (line   6)
* Uniform resource locator, referring to: uref.               (line   6)
* Unique nodename requirement:           Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line   8)
* Unnumbered float, creating:            float.               (line  39)
* Unprocessed text:                      Comments.            (line  19)
* Unsplit file creation:                 Unsplit.             (line   6)
* Up node of Top node:                   First Node.          (line  13)
* UPDATED Automake variable:             GNU Sample Texts.    (line  32)
* Updating nodes and menus:              Updating Nodes and Menus.
                                                              (line   6)
* Updating requirements:                 Updating Requirements.
                                                              (line   6)
* URI syntax for Info:                   Info Files.          (line  78)
* URL, indicating:                       indicateurl.         (line   6)
* URL, referring to:                     uref.                (line   6)
* Usage tips:                            Tips.                (line   8)
* User input:                            kbd.                 (line  15)
* User options, marking:                 Variables Commands.  (line  57)
* User-defined Texinfo commands:         Defining New Texinfo Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* Using Texinfo in general:              Using Texinfo.       (line   6)
* Validating a large file:               Using Info-validate. (line   6)
* Validation of pointers:                Pointer Validation.  (line   6)
* Value of an expression, indicating:    result.              (line   6)
* Variables, object-oriented:            Object-Oriented Variables.
                                                              (line   6)
* Verbatim copying license:              Verbatim Copying License.
                                                              (line   6)
* Verbatim environment:                  verbatim.            (line   6)
* Verbatim in-line text:                 verb.                (line   6)
* Verbatim, include file:                verbatiminclude.     (line   6)
* VERSION Automake variable:             GNU Sample Texts.    (line  32)
* Version control keywords, preventing expansion of: w.       (line  28)
* Version number, for install-info:      Invoking install-info.
                                                              (line  84)
* Vertically holding text together:      group.               (line   6)
* Visibility of conditional text:        Conditionals.        (line   6)
* vr (variable) index:                   Predefined Indices.  (line  27)
* W3 consortium:                         Output Formats.      (line  26)
* Weinberg, Zack:                        History.             (line  14)
* Weisshaus, Melissa:                    History.             (line  14)
* White space in node name:              Node Line Requirements.
                                                              (line  44)
* White space, excessive:                Breaks.              (line  11)
* Whitespace in macros:                  Defining Macros.     (line  40)
* Whitespace, collapsed around continuations: Def Cmd Continuation Lines.
                                                              (line  31)
* Whitespace, inserting:                 Multiple Spaces.     (line   6)
* Width of images:                       Image Scaling.       (line   6)
* Width of text area:                    pagesizes.           (line   6)
* Widths, defining multitable column:    Multitable Column Widths.
                                                              (line   6)
* Wildcards:                             Format with tex/texindex.
                                                              (line  31)
* Words and phrases, marking them:       Marking Text.        (line   6)
* Writing a menu:                        Writing a Menu.      (line   6)
* Writing an @node line:                 Writing a Node.      (line   6)
* Writing index entries:                 Indexing Commands.   (line  27)
* xdvi:                                  Output Formats.      (line  36)
* XML output:                            Output Formats.      (line  62)
* XML, including raw:                    Raw Formatter Commands.
                                                              (line   6)
* XPM image format:                      Image Syntax.        (line  23)
* Years, in copyright line:              copying.             (line  48)
* Zaretskii, Eli:                        History.             (line  14)
* Zuhn, David D.:                        History.             (line  14)


