.\"     $NetBSD: rump_sp.7,v 1.2.4.2 2017/12/03 11:39:20 jdolecek Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Antti Kantee.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd February 7, 2011
.Dt RUMP_SP 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rump_sp
.Nd rump remote system call support
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
facility allows clients to attach to a rump kernel server over a
socket and perform system calls.
While making a local rump system call is faster than calling the
host kernel, a remote system call over a socket is slower.
This facility is therefore meant mostly for operations which are
not performance critical, such as configuration of a rump kernel
server.
.Ss Clients
The
.Nx
base system comes with multiple preinstalled clients which can be
used to configure a rump kernel and request diagnostic information.
These clients run as hybrids partially in the host system and
partially against the rump kernel.
For example, network-related clients will typically avoid making
any file system related system calls against the rump kernel, since
it is not guaranteed that a rump network server has file system
support.
Another example is DNS: since a rump server very rarely has a DNS
service configured, host networking is used to do DNS lookups.
.Pp
Some examples of clients include
.Nm rump.ifconfig
which configures interfaces,
.Nm rump.sysctl
which is used to access the
.Xr sysctl 7
namespace
and
.Nm rump.traceroute
which is used to display a network trace starting from the rump kernel.
.Pp
Also, almost any unmodified dynamically linked application
(for example
.Xr telnet 1
or
.Xr ls 1 )
can be used as a rump kernel client with the help of system call hijacking.
See
.Xr rumphijack 3
for more information.
.Ss Connecting to the server
A remote rump server is specified using an URL.
Currently two types of URLs are supported: TCP and local domain sockets.
The TCP URL is of the format tcp://ip.address:port/ and the local
domain URL is unix://path.
The latter can accept relative or absolute paths.
Note that absolute paths require three leading slashes.
.Pp
To preserve the standard usage of the rump clients' counterparts
the environment variable
.Ev RUMP_SERVER
is used to specify the server URL.
To keep track of which rump kernel the current shell is using,
modifying the shell prompt is recommended -- this is analogous
to the visual clue you have when you login from one machine to
another.
.Ss Client credentials and access control
The current scheme gives all connecting clients root credentials.
It is recommended to take precautions which prevent unauthorized
access.
For a unix domain socket it is enough to prevent access to the
socket using file system permissions.
For TCP/IP sockets the only available means is to prevent network
access to the socket with the use of firewalls.
More fine-grained access control based on cryptographic credentials
may be implemented at a future date.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Get a list of file systems supported by a rump kernel server
(in case that particular server does not support file systems,
an error will be returned):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ env RUMP_SERVER=unix://sock rump.sysctl vfs.generic.fstypes
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rump_server 1 ,
.Xr rump 3 ,
.Xr rumpclient 3 ,
.Xr rumphijack 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
first appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
