.\"	$NetBSD: gio.4,v 1.13 2006/11/24 19:46:58 christos Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This document is derived from work contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Antti Kantee.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 20, 2006
.Dt GIO 4 sgimips
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gio
.Nd SGI's early PCI-like bus
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "gio0 at imc0"
.Cd "gio0 at pic0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
bus is a bus for connecting high-speed peripherals to the main memory and
CPU.
The devices themselves are typically (but not necessarily) connected to the
.Xr hpc 4
peripheral controller, and memory and CPU are accessed through the
.Xr imc 4
(Indy Memory Controller) or
.Xr pic 4
(Processor Interface Controller).
The
.Nm
bus is found on the Personal Iris 4D/3x, Indigo, Indy, Challenge-S, and
Indigo2 machines and exists in three incarnations: GIO32, GIO32-bis, and GIO64.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr grtwo 4 ,
.Xr hpc 4 ,
.Xr imc 4 ,
.Xr newport 4 ,
.Xr pic 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
.Sh CAVEATS
On Challenge-S systems only one
.Nm
expansion slot may be used with a DMA-capable device.
This is due to the fact that the IOPLUS board uses one of the slots'
DMA channels for the additional
.Xr sq 4
Ethernet.
Which slot to use with a DMA-capable card depends on the card in
question.
HPC1.5-based cards, such as the E++ Ethernet Adapter and GIO32 SCSI
Adapter, must be placed in slot #1 (next to the memory banks).
All other DMA-capable boards must be placed in slot #0 (closest to
the edge of the case).
In either case the other slot may only accommodate a PIO card.
