.\"	$NetBSD: sq.4,v 1.5 2008/04/30 13:10:56 martin Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This document is derived from work contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Steve Rumble.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 21, 2006
.Dt SQ 4 sgimips
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sq
.Nd SEEQ 8003/80c03 Ethernet driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "sq* at hpc? offset ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface provides access to a Ethernet network via the SEEQ 8003
and 80c03 (aka SGI EDLC) chip sets.
DMA is provided by
.Xr hpc 4 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
is found in the Personal Iris 4D/3x, Indigo, Indy, Challenge S, Challenge M, and
Indigo2 machines, as well as the SGI E++ GIO32bis Ethernet adapter.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr hpc 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr mii 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.6
with support for
.Xr hpc 4
revision 3.
Revision 1 and 1.5 support was added in
.Nx 2.0 .
