.\"	$NetBSD: boot.cfg.5,v 1.4.2.2 2008/01/09 01:39:13 matt Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Stephen Borrill
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 19, 2007
.Dt BOOT.CFG 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm boot.cfg
.Nd configuration file for /boot
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file /boot.cfg
is used to alter the behaviour of the standard boot loader described in
.Xr boot 8 .
Configuration changes include setting the timeout, choosing a console device,
altering the banner text and displaying a menu allowing boot commands to be
easily chosen.
If a
.Nm
file is not present, the system will boot as normal.
.Ss FILE FORMAT
The format of the file is a series of lines containing keyword/value pairs
separated by an equals sign
.Pq Sq = .
There should be no whitespace surrounding the equals sign.
Lines beginning with a hash
.Pq Sq #
are comments and will be ignored.
.Pp
Some keywords can be present multiple times in the file to define additional
items.
Such keywords are noted below.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width timeout
.It Sy banner
(may be present multiple times)
The text from banner lines is displayed instead of the standard welcome text
by the boot loader.
Up to 10 lines can be defined.
No special character sequences are recognised, so to specify a blank line, a
banner line with no value should be given.
.It Sy menu
(may be present multiple times)
Used to define a menu item to be displayed to the end-user at boot time
which allows a series of boot commands to be run without further typing.
The value consists of the required menu text, followed by a colon
.Pq Sq \&:
and then the desired command.
If the specified menu text is empty
(the colon appears immediately after the equals sign),
then the displayed menu text is the same as the command.
For example:
.Bd -literal
menu=Boot normally:boot
menu=Boot single-user:boot -s
menu=:boot hd1a:netbsd -as
.Ed
.Pp
Each menu item will be prefixed by an ascending number when displayed,
i.e. the order in the
.Nm
file is important.
.Pp
The command is executed just as though the user had typed it in
and so can be any valid command that would be accepted at the
normal boot prompt.
In addition,
.So prompt Sc
can be used to drop to the normal boot prompt.
.It Sy timeout
If the value is greater than zero, this specifies the time in seconds
that the boot loader will wait for the end-user to choose a menu item.
During the countdown period, they may press Return to choose the default
option or press a number key corresponding to a menu option.
If any other key is pressed, the countdown will stop and the user will be
prompted to choose a menu option with no further time limit.
If the timeout value is set to zero, the default option will be booted
immediately.
If the timeout value is negative or is not a number, there will be no
time limit for the user to choose an option.
.It Sy default
Used to specify the default menu item  which will be chosen in the case of
Return being pressed or the timeout timer reaching zero.
The value is the number of the menu item as displayed.
As described above, the menu items are counted from 1 in the order listed in
.Nm .
If not specified, the default value will be option 1, i.e. the first item.
.It Sy consdev
Changes the console device to that specified in the value.
Valid values are any of those that could be specified at the normal boot
prompt with the consdev command.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Here is an example
.Nm
file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
banner=Welcome to NetBSD
banner==================
banner=
banner=Please choose an option from the following menu:
menu=Boot normally:boot
menu=Boot single-user:boot -s
menu=Boot from second disk:boot hd1a:
menu=Go to command line (advanced users only):prompt
timeout=-1
default=1
.Ed
.Pp
This will display:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Welcome to NetBSD
=================

Please choose an option from the following menu:

      1. Boot normally
      2. Boot single-user
      3. Boot from second disk
      4. Go to command line (advanced users only)

Option [1]:
.Ed
.Pp
It will then wait for the user to type 1, 2, 3 or 4 followed by Return.
Pressing Return by itself will run option 1.
There will be no timeout.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr boot 8
.Sh BUGS
Support for
.Nm
is currently for 
.Nx Ns /i386 and
.Nx Ns /amd64 only.
It is hoped that its use will be extended to other appropriate ports that
use the
.Xr boot 8
interface.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility appeared in
.Nx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
extensions to
.Xr boot 8
were written by
.An Stephen Borrill
.Aq sborrill@NetBSD.org .
