.\"	$NetBSD: group.5,v 1.13 2001/09/08 01:26:54 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\" Portions Copyright(c) 1994, Jason Downs. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)group.5	8.3 (Berkeley) 4/19/94
.\"
.Dd November 17, 2000
.Dt GROUP 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm group
.Nd format of the group permissions file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file
.Pa /etc/group
is the local source of group information.
It can be used in conjunction with the Hesiod domain
.Sq group ,
and the
.Tn NIS
maps
.Sq group.byname
and
.Sq group.bygid ,
as controlled by
.Xr nsswitch.conf 5 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
file consists of newline separated
.Tn ASCII
records, one per group, containing four colon
.Ql \&:
separated fields.
Each line has the form:
.Dl group:passwd:gid:[member[,member]...]
.Pp
These fields are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width password -offset indent -compact
.It Em group
Name of the group.
.It Em passwd
Group's
.Em encrypted
password.
.It Em gid
The group's decimal ID.
.It Em member
Group members.
.El
.Pp
The
.Em group
field is the group name used for granting file access to users
who are members of the group.
.Pp
The
.Em gid
field is the number associated with the group name.
They should both be unique across the system (and often
across a group of systems) since they control file access.
.Pp
The
.Em passwd
field
is an optional
.Em encrypted
password.
This field is rarely used
and an asterisk is normally placed in it rather than leaving it blank.
.Pp
The
.Em member
field contains the names of users granted the privileges of
.Em group .
The member names are separated by commas without spaces or newlines.
A user is automatically in a group if that group was specified
in their
.Pa /etc/passwd
entry and does not need to be added to that group in the
.Pa /etc/group
file.
.Pp
The group with the name
.Dq wheel
has a special meaning to the
.Xr su 1
command: if it exists and has any members, only users listed in that group
are allowed to
.Nm su
to
.Dq root .
.Sh HESIOD SUPPORT
If
.Sq dns
is specified for the
.Sq group
database in
.Xr nsswitch.conf 5 ,
then
.Nm
lookups occur from the
.Sq group
Hesiod domain.
.Sh NIS SUPPORT
If
.Sq nis
is specified for the
.Sq group
database in
.Xr nsswitch.conf 5 ,
then
.Nm
lookups occur from the
.Sq group.byname
and
.Sq group.bygid
.Tn NIS
map.
.Sh COMPAT SUPPORT
If
.Sq compat
is specified for the
.Sq group
database, and either
.Sq dns
or
.Sq nis
is specified for the
.Sq group_compat
database in
.Xr nsswitch.conf 5 ,
then the
.Nm
file may also contain lines of the format
.Pp
+name:*::
.Pp
which causes the specified group to be included from the
.Sq group
Hesiod domain
or the
.Sq group.byname
.Tn NIS
map (respectively).
.Pp
If no group name is specified, or the plus sign
.Pq Dq \&+
appears alone
on line, all groups are included from the
Hesiod domain or the
.Tn NIS
map.
.Pp
Hesiod or
.Tn NIS
compat references may appear anywhere in the file, but the single
plus sign
.Pq Dq \&+
form should be on the last line, for historical reasons.
Only the first group with a specific name encountered, whether in the
.Nm
file itself, or included via Hesiod or
.Tn NIS ,
will be used.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/group -compact
.It Pa /etc/group
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr passwd 1 ,
.Xr su 1 ,
.Xr setgroups 2 ,
.Xr initgroups 3 ,
.Xr crypt 3 ,
.Xr nsswitch.conf 5 ,
.Xr passwd 5 ,
.Xr yp 8
.Sh BUGS
The
.Xr passwd 1
command does not change the
.Nm group
passwords.
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
file format appeared in
.At v6 .
.Pp
The
.Tn NIS
file format first appeared in SunOS.
.Pp
The Hesiod support first appeared in
.Nx 1.4 .
