.\"	$NetBSD: login.conf.5,v 1.11 2001/09/08 01:29:06 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995,1996,1997 Berkeley Software Design, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Berkeley Software Design,
.\"	Inc.
.\" 4. The name of Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  may not be used to endorse
.\"    or promote products derived from this software without specific prior
.\"    written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY BERKELEY SOFTWARE DESIGN, INC. ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL BERKELEY SOFTWARE DESIGN, INC. BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" BSDI login.conf.5,v 2.19 1998/02/19 23:39:39 prb Exp
.\"
.Dd November 17, 2000
.Dt LOGIN.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm login.conf
.Nd login class capability data base
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm login.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm login.conf
file describes the various attributes of login classes.
A login class determines what styles of authentication are available
as well as session resource limits and environment setup.
While designed primarily for the
.Xr login 1
program,
it is also used by other programs, e.g.,
.Xr rexecd 8 ,
which need to set up a user environment.
.Pp
The class to be used is normally determined by the
.Li class
field in the password file (see
.Xr passwd 5 ) .
The class is used to look up a corresponding entry in the
.Pa login.conf
file.
A special class called
.Dq default
will be used (if it exists) if there is no other match.
.Sh CAPABILITIES
Refer to
.Xr getcap 3
for a description of the file layout.
An example entry is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
classname|Description entry:\\
	:capability=value:\\
	:booleancapability:\\
		\&.\&.\&.
	:lastcapability=value:
.Ed
.Pp
All entries in the
.Nm login.conf
file are either boolean or use a `=' to separate the capability
from the value.
The types are described after the capability table.
.Bl -column minpasswordlen program default
.Sy Name	Type	Default	Description
.\"
.sp
.It Sy copyright Ta file Ta "" Ta
File containing additional copyright information.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy coredumpsize Ta size Ta "" Ta
Maximum coredump size limit.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy cputime Ta time Ta "" Ta
CPU usage limit.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy datasize Ta size Ta "" Ta
Maximum data size limit.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy filesize Ta size Ta "" Ta
Maximum file size limit.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy hushlogin Ta bool Ta Li false Ta
Same as having a
.Pa $HOME/.hushlogin
file.
See
.Xr login 1 .
.\"
.sp
.It Sy ignorenologin Ta bool Ta Li false Ta
Not affected by
.Pa nologin
files.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy login-retries Ta number Ta 10 Ta
Maximum number of login attempts allowed.
.\"
.It Sy login-backoff Ta number Ta 3 Ta
Number of login attempts after which to start random back-off.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy maxproc Ta number Ta "" Ta
Maximum number of process.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy memorylocked Ta size Ta "" Ta
Maximum locked in core memory size limit.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy memoryuse Ta size Ta "" Ta
Maximum in core memoryuse size limit.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy minpasswordlen Ta number Ta "" Ta
The minimum length a local password may be.
Used by the
.Xr passwd 1
utility.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy nologin Ta file Ta "" Ta
If the file exists it will be displayed
and the login session will be terminated.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy openfiles Ta number Ta "" Ta
Maximum number of open files per process.
.\"
.\"XX .sp
.\"XX .It Sy password-dead Ta time Ta Li 0 Ta
.\"XX Length of time a password may be expired but not quite dead yet.
.\"XX When set (for both the client and remote server machine when doing
.\"XX remote authentication), a user is allowed to log in just one more
.\"XX time after their password (but not account) has expired.  This allows
.\"XX a grace period for updating their password.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy passwordtime Ta time Ta "" Ta
Used by
.Xr passwd 1
to set next password expiry date.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy password-warn Ta time Ta Li 2w Ta
If the user's password will expire within this length of time then
warn the user of this.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy path Ta path Ta Li "/bin /usr/bin" Ta
.br
Default search path.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy priority Ta number Ta "" Ta
Initial priority (nice) level.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy requirehome Ta bool Ta Li false Ta
Require home directory to login.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy setenv Ta list Ta "" Ta
Comma separated list of environment variables and values to be set.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy shell Ta program Ta "" Ta
Session shell to execute rather than the shell specified in the password file.
The
.Ev SHELL
environment variable will contain the shell specified in the password file.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy stacksize Ta size Ta "" Ta
Maximum stack size limit.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy term Ta string Ta Li su Ta
Default terminal type if not able to determine from other means.
.\"
.sp
.It Sy umask Ta number Ta Li 022 Ta
Initial umask.
Should always have a leading
.Li 0
to assure octal interpretation.
See
.Xr umask 2 .
.\"
.sp
.It Sy welcome Ta file Ta Li /etc/motd Ta
File containing welcome message.
.El
.Pp
The resource limit entries
.No ( Ns Sy cputime , filesize , datasize , stacksize , coredumpsize ,
.Sy memoryuse , memorylocked , maxproc ,
and
.Sy openfiles )
actually specify both the maximum and current limits (see
.Xr getrlimit 2 ) .
The current limit is the one normally used,
although the user is permitted to increase the current limit to the
maximum limit.
The maximum and current limits may be specified individually by appending
a
.Sq Sy \-max
or
.Sq Sy \-cur
to the capability name (e.g.,
.Sy openfiles-max
and
.Sy openfiles-cur Ns No ) .
.Pp
.Nx
will never define capabilities which start with
.Li x-
or
.Li X- ,
these are reserved for external use (unless included through contributed
software).
.Pp
The argument types are defined as:
.Bl -tag -width programxx
.\"
.It Sy file
Path name to a text file.
.\"
.It Sy list
A comma separated list of values.
.\"
.It Sy number
A number.  A leading
.Li 0x
implies the number is expressed in hexadecimal.
A leading
.Li 0
implies the number is expressed in octal.
Any other number is treated as decimal.
.\"
.It Sy path
A space separated list of path names.
If a
.Sq Li ~
is the first character in the path name, the
.Sq Li ~
is expanded to the user's home directory.
.\"
.It Sy program
A path name to program.
.\"
.It Sy size
A number which expresses a size in bytes.
It may have a trailing
.Li b
to multiply the value by 512, a
.Li k
to multiply the value by 1 K (1024), and a
.Li m
to multiply the value by 1 M (1048576).
.\"
.It Sy time
A time in seconds.
A time may be expressed as a series of numbers
which are added together.
Each number may have a trailing character to
represent time units:
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.\"
.It Sy y
Indicates a number of 365 day years.
.\"
.It Sy w
Indicates a number of 7 day weeks.
.\"
.It Sy d
Indicates a number of 24 hour days.
.\"
.It Sy h
Indicates a number of 60 minute hours.
.\"
.It Sy m
Indicates a number of 60 second minutes.
.\"
.It Sy s
Indicates a number of seconds.
.El
.Pp
For example, to indicate 1 and 1/2 hours, the following string
could be used:
.Li 1h30m .
.El
.\"
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/login.conf.db -compact
.It Pa /etc/login.conf
login class capability database
.It Pa /etc/login.conf.db
hashed database built with
.Xr cap_mkdb 1
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getcap 3 ,
.Xr login_cap 3 ,
.Xr ttys 5 ,
.Xr cap_mkdb 1 ,
.Xr ftpd 8 ,
.Xr login 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
configuration file appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
