.\"	$NetBSD: intio.4,v 1.5 2001/05/04 10:51:57 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 MINOURA Makoto
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"    This product includes software developed by Minoura Makoto.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 17, 1999
.Os
.Dt INTIO 4 x68k
.Sh NAME
.Nm intio
.Nd X68K internal I/O space driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "intio0 at mainbus0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a virtual device corresponding to the x68k internal I/O space.
.Pp
Internal I/O space spans from 0xc00000 to 0xffffff of the x68k
physical address space, and is mapped permanently in the kernel virtual space
at the very early time of the kernel startup procedure.
.Pp
.Nm
driver manages the internal I/O space of x68k.
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -tag
.It
Address range management to avoid confliction of address space of
which devices probe by touching hardware port is difficult.
.It
Interrupt vector management.
.It
.Xr bus_space 9
and
.Xr bus_dma 9
implementation.
.It
Other utility functions.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
is always required to run NetBSD kernel.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr bus_space 9 ,
.Xr bus_dma 9
