.\" $NetBSD: amdzentemp.4,v 1.4 2018/01/25 10:28:57 pgoyette Exp $
.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Christoph Egger
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man4/coretemp.4,v 1.4 2007/10/15 20:00:19 netchild Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 24, 2018
.Dt AMDZENTEMP 4 x86
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm amdzentemp
.Nd AMD Zen CPU family on-die digital thermal sensor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "amdzentemp* at amdsmn?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the on-die digital thermal sensor present
on AMD Ryzen CPUs
.Pp
These sensors provide 0.125\(deC accuracy. There is one sensor for each
CPU socket.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver reports temperatures through the
.Xr envsys 4
API.
.Bl -column "CPUN sensor0" "Units" "Typical Use" -offset indent
.It Sy "Sensor" Ta Sy "Units" Ta Sy "Typical Use"
.It CPU Ns Em N No sensor0 Ta \(*mK Ta cpu Ns Em N No temperature
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr amdtemp 4 ,
.Xr envsys 4 ,
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr powerd 8
.Sh BUGS
The temperature reading provided to
.Xr envsys 4
needs to have a CPU-dependent offset applied.
For Ryzen X processors, the offset is 20\(deC, while for Threadripper
processors an offset of 27\(deC is needed.
.Pp
The sensor has a thermal-trip value which should be retrieved and
provided to
.Xr envsys 4
as the sensors critical-maximum value.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.4
named
.Dq kate .
It was then ported to
.Nx 5.0
under the name
.Dq amdtemp .
The
.Fx
version of the driver was updated with support for newer AMD CPUs.
For
.Nx ,
the support for the newer CPUs was separated into its own
.Nm
driver.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Constantine A. Murenin Aq Mt cnst@openbsd.org
whilst at the University of Waterloo.
Porting of support for the newer AMD CPUs from
.Fx
was provided by
.An Ian Clark .
