.\" $NetBSD: imcsmb.4,v 1.5 2018/02/25 12:51:33 uwe Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Paul Goyette
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause-FreeBSD
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Panasas
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 24, 2018
.Dt IMCSMB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm imcsmb
.Nd Intel integrated Memory Controller (iMC) SMBus controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd imc* at pci? dev ? func ?
.Cd imcsmb* at imc?
.Cd iic* at i2cbus?
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the following
line in
.Xr boot.cfg 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
load=imcsmb
.Ed
or add the following line to your /etc/modules file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
imcsmb
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides
.Xr iic 4
support for the SMBus controller functionality in the integrated Memory
Controllers (iMCs) embedded in Intel Sandybridge-Xeon, Ivybridge-Xeon,
Haswell-Xeon, and Broadwell-Xeon CPUs.
Each CPU implements one or more iMCs, depending on the number of cores; each
iMC implements two SMBus controllers (iMC-SMBs).
The iMC-SMBs are used by the iMCs to read configuration information from the
DIMMs during POST.
They may also be used, by motherboard firmware or a BMC, to monitor the
temperature of the DIMMs.
.Pp
The iMC-SMBs are
.Sy not
general-purpose SMBus controllers.
By their nature, they are only ever attached to DIMMs, so they implement only
the SMBus operations needed for communicating with DIMMs.
Specifically:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -offset indent -compact
.It
READB
.It
READW
.It
WRITEB
.It
WRITEW
.El
.Pp
A more detailed discussion of the hardware and driver architecture can be found
at the top of
.Pa sys/dev/imcsmb/imc.c .
.Sh WARNINGS
As mentioned above, firmware might use the iMC-SMBs to read DIMM temperatures.
The public iMC documentation does not describe any sort of coordination
mechanism to prevent requests from different sources \(em such as the motherboard
firmware, a BMC, or the operating system \(em from interfering with each other.
.Pp
.Bf Sy
Therefore, it is highly recommended that developers contact the motherboard
vendor for any board-specific instructions on how to disable and re-enable DIMM
temperature monitoring.
.Ef
.Pp
DIMM temperature monitoring should be disabled before returning from
.Fn imcsmb_pci_request_bus ,
and re-enabled before returning from
.Fn imcsmb_pci_release_bus .
The driver includes comments to that effect at the appropriate locations.
The driver has been tested and shown to work, with only that type of
modification, on certain motherboards from Intel.
(Unfortunately, those modifications were based on material covered under a
non-disclosure agreement, and therefore are not included in this driver.)
The driver has also been tested and shown to work as-is on various motherboards
from SuperMicro.
.Pp
Because of the above, the
.Nm
driver is not included in the default
.Dv GENERIC
kernel.
In order to use the
.Nm
driver, you must compile a custom kernel, or load the driver using
.Xr modload 8 .
.Pp
The
.Xr iic 4
driver will connect to the i2cbus instances created by
.Nm .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iic 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 12.0 .
It was later ported to
.Nx 9.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was originally written for Panasas by
.An Joe Kloss .
It was substantially refactored, and this manual page was written, by
.An Ravi Pokala Aq Mt rpokala@freebsd.org .
It was adapted to
.Nx
by
.An Paul Goyette Aq Mt pgoyette@NetBSD.org .
