.\"	$NetBSD: sqlite.3lua,v 1.4.8.2 2014/08/20 00:02:34 tls Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Marc Balmer <mbalmer@NetBSD.org>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd October 28, 2013
.Dt SQLITE 3lua
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sqlite
.Nd access
SQLite3 files from Lua
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "local sqlite = require 'sqlite'"
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.\"
.\" GENERAL FUNCTIONS
.\"
.It Dv err = sqlite.initialize()
.It Dv sqlite.shutdown()
.It Dv db, err = sqlite.open(file [, flags])
.It Dv version = sqlite.libversion()
.It Dv version = sqlite.libversion_number()
.It Dv id = sqlite.sourceid()
.\"
.\" DATABASE FUNCTIONS
.\"
.Pp
.It Dv err = sqlite.close(db)
.It Dv stmt, err = sqlite.prepare(db, sql)
.It Dv err = sqlite.exec(db, sql)
.It Dv err = sqlite.errcode(db)
.It Dv msg = sqlite.errmsg(db)
.It Dv res = sqlite.get_autocommit(db)
.It Dv res = sqlite.changes(db)
.\"
.\" STATEMENT FUNCTIONS
.\"
.Pp
.It Dv err = sqlite.bind(stmt, pidx, value)
.It Dv count = sqlite.bind_parameter_count(stmt)
.It Dv pidx = sqlite.bind_parameter_index(stmt, name)
.It Dv name = sqlite.bind_parameter_name(stmt, pidx)
.It Dv err = sqlite.step(stmt)
.It Dv value = sqlite.column(stmt, cidx)
.It Dv sqlite.reset(stmt)
.It Dv sqlite.clear_bindings(stmt)
.It Dv sqlite.finalize(stmt)
.It Dv name = sqlite.column_name(stmt, cidx)
.It Dv count = sqlite.column_count(stmt)
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
Lua binding provides access to SQLite3 files.
.Sh GENERAL FUNCTIONS
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Dv err = sqlite.initialize()
Initialize the SQLite3 library.
Workstation applications using SQLite normally do not need to invoke this
function.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.shutdown()
Deallocate any resources that were allocated by
.Fn sqlite.initialize .
Workstation applications using SQLite normally do not need to invoke this
function.
.Pp
.It Dv db, err = sqlite.open(file [, flags])
Open a database, optionally passing flags.
When called without flags, the database will be opened for reading and
writing and it will be created if it does not yet exist.
The following flags are defined:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Dv sqlite.OPEN_READONLY
The database is opened in read-only mode.
If the database does not already exist, an error is returned.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.OPEN_READWRITE
The database is opened for reading and writing if possible, or reading only if
the file is write protected by the operating system.
In either case the database must already exist, otherwise an error is returned.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.OPEN_CREATE
The database is opened for reading and writing, and is created if it does not
already exist.
.El
.Pp
.It Dv version = sqlite.libversion()
Return the SQLite3 library version number as a string.
.Pp
.It Dv version = sqlite.libversion_number()
Return the SQLite3 library version number as a number.
.Pp
.It Dv id = sqlite.sourceid()
Return the SQLite3 library source id as a string.
.El
.Sh DATABASE FUNCTIONS
Database functions operate on database objects returned by
.Fn sqlite.open .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Dv err = sqlite.close(db)
Close an open database.
Like with all remaining database functions, this function can also be called
using the Lua "colon" syntactic sugar as
.Em db:close() .
.Pp
.It Dv stmt, err = sqlite.prepare(db, sql)
Return a prepared statement.
.Pp
.It Dv err = sqlite.exec(db, sql)
Directly execute an SQL statement.
Be careful when creating SQL on the fly (SQL injection attacks).
.Pp
.It Dv err = sqlite.errcode(db)
Return the numeric error code.
.Pp
.It Dv msg = sqlite.errmsg(db)
Return the error message as a string.
.Pp
.It Dv res = sqlite.get_autocommit(db)
Return the autocommit flag.
.Pp
.It Dv res = sqlite.changes(db)
This function returns the number of database rows that were changed or inserted
or deleted by the most recently completed SQL statement on the database.
.El
.Sh STATEMENT FUNCTIONS
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Dv err = sqlite.bind(stmt, pidx, value)
Bind
.Ar value
to the parameter
.Ar pidx
in the prepared statement
.Ar stmt .
.Pp
.It Dv count = sqlite.bind_parameter_count(stmt)
Return the number of parameters in the prepared statement
.Ar stmt .
.Pp
.It Dv pidx = sqlite.bind_parameter_index(stmt, name)
Return the parameter index for
.Ar name
in the prepared statement
.Ar stmt .
.Pp
.It Dv name = sqlite.bind_parameter_name(stmt, pidx)
Return the parameter name for the parameter index
.Ar pidx
in the prepared statement
.Ar stmt .
.Pp
.It Dv err = sqlite.step(stmt)
Execute prepared statement
.Ar stmt .
.Pp
.It Dv value = sqlite.column(stmt, cidx)
Return the value at column
.Ar cidx
in the prepared statement
.Ar stmt .
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.reset(stmt)
The
.Fn sqlite.reset
function is called to reset a prepared statement object back
to its initial state, ready to be re-executed.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.clear_bindings(stmt)
Contrary to the intuition of many,
.Fn sqlite.reset
does not reset the bindings on a prepared statement.
Use this routine to reset all host parameters to
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.finalize(stmt)
The
.Fn sqlite.finalize
function is called to delete a prepared statement.
.Pp
.It Dv name = sqlite.column_name(stmt, cidx)
Return the name assigned to a particular column in the result set of a SELECT
statement.
.Pp
.It Dv count = sqlite.column_count(stmt)
Return the number of columns in the result set returned by the prepared
statement
.Ar stmt .
This routine returns 0 if
.Ar stmt
is an SQL statement that does not return data (for example an UPDATE).
.El
.Sh ERROR CODES
Most functions return an error code, the following error codes
are defined:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Dv sqlite.OK
Successful result.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.ERROR
SQL error or missing database.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.INTERNAL
Internal logic error in SQLite.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.PERM
Access permission denied.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.ABORT
Callback routine requested an abort.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.BUSY
The database file is locked.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.LOCKED
A table in the database is locked.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.NOMEM
Out of memory.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.READONLY
Attempt to write a readonly database.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.INTERRUPT
Operation terminated by
.Fn sqlite3_interrupt .
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.IOERR
Some kind of disk I/O error occurred.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.CORRUPT
The database disk image is malformed.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.NOTFOUND
Unknown opcode in
.Fn sqlite3_file_control .
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.FULL
Insertion failed because database is full.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.CANTOPEN
Unable to open the database file.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.PROTOCOL
Database lock protocol error.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.EMPTY
Database is empty.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.SCHEMA
The database schema changed.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.TOOBIG
String or BLOB exceeds size limit.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.CONSTRAINT
Abort due to constraint violation.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.MISMATCH
Data type mismatch.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.MISUSE
Library used incorrectly.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.NOLFS
Uses OS features not supported on host.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.AUTH
Authorization denied.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.FORMAT
Auxiliary database format error.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.RANGE
2nd parameter to
.Fn sqlite.bind
out of range.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.NOTADB
File opened that is not a database file.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.ROW
.Fn sqlite.step
has another row ready.
.Pp
.It Dv sqlite.DONE
.Fn sqlite.step
has finished executing.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lua 1 ,
.Xr luac 1 ,
.Xr sqlite3 1 ,
.Xr intro 3lua
.Sh HISTORY
An
.Nm
manual appeared in
.Nx 7.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
Lua binding was written by
.An Marc Balmer Aq Mt mbalmer@NetBSD.org .
