.\" $NetBSD: __builtin_types_compatible_p.3,v 1.1 2010/12/21 15:05:02 jruoho Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Jukka Ruohonen <jruohonen@iki.fi>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 21, 2010
.Dt __BUILTIN_TYPES_COMPATIBLE_P 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm __builtin_types_compatible_p
.Nd GNU extension to check equivalent types
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ft int
.Fn __builtin_types_compatible_p "type_a" "type_b"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn __builtin_types_compatible_p
is a
.Tn GNU
extension for determining whether two types are equivalent.
If
.Fa type_a
is equivalent to
.Fa type_b ,
a value 1 is returned.
Otherwise
.Fn __builtin_types_compatible_p
returns 0.
.Pp
The following remarks should be taken into account.
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
The architecture-specific size of the two types
does not have an impact on the result.
For example,
.Fn sizeof "char *"
and
.Fn sizeof "int"
result the same value on i386, but the types naturally are not equivalent.
.It
Type qualifiers are ignored.
The function returns the same value for
.Vt long
and
.Vt const long .
.It
The amount of pointer indirection affects the result.
For example,
.Vt double *
is not equivalent to
.Vt double ** .
.It
Two types defined with
.Em typedef
are equivalent if and only if their underlying types are equivalent.
.It
The
.Em enum
type is a special case in that two
.Em enum
types are not considered equivalent.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example combines
.Fn __builtin_types_compatible_p
and the
.Xr typeof 3
construct:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#define __COMPARE_TYPES(v, t)      \\
         __builtin_types_compatible_p(__typeof__(v), t)

\&...

if (__COMPARE_TYPES(p, double) != 0)
	err(EX_DATAERR, "invalid type");
.Ed
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gcc 1 ,
.Xr __builtin_constant_p 3 ,
.Xr typeof 3
.Sh CAVEATS
This is a non-standard, compiler-specific extension.
