.\" $NetBSD: param.3,v 1.2 2011/04/08 07:57:48 jruoho Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Jukka Ruohonen <jruohonen@iki.fi>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 8, 2011
.Dt PARAM 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm param
.Nd common parameters
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.Ft size
.Fn MAX "size a" "size b"
.Ft size
.Fn MIN "size a" "size b"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.In sys/param.h
header includes some common definitions and macros specific to
.Nx .
The header is perhaps best characterized as a kernel equivalent of
.In sys/types.h .
The following list summarizes the provided definitions and macros.
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
First and foremost, the header defines the version of
.Nx .
This is defined as
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#define __NetBSD_Version__    599004800   /* 5.99.48 */
.Ed
.Pp
The general format is
.Dq MMmmrrpp00 ,
where
.Sq MM
and
.Sq mm
denote the major and minor version, respectively,
.Sq rr
is provided for compatibility, and
.Sq pp
defines the patch level.
.It
Common utility macros such as
.Fn MAX
and
.Fn MIN
as well as more specific macros such as
.Xr STACK 9 ,
.Xr ctod 9 ,
.Xr mstohz 9 ,
.Xr roundup 9 ,
and
.Xr setbit 9 .
.It
Numerous miscellaneous definitions such as limits,
constants for the kernel
.Xr memoryallocators 9 ,
scale factors used by the scheduler,
.Xr kthread 9
priorities, and many others.
.It
Definitions provided for historical and compatibility reasons.
Examples range from definitions such as
.Dq #define BSD
to old priority levels used in the kernel.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cdefs 3 ,
.Xr types 3
.Sh HISTORY
A
.In param.h
header appeared already in the
.At v4 .
