.\" $NetBSD: paths.3,v 1.1 2011/03/30 10:06:59 jruoho Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Jukka Ruohonen.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 30, 2011
.Os
.Dt PATHS 3
.Sh NAME
.Nm paths
.Nd default system paths
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In paths.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.In paths.h
header defines some default paths used in
.Nx .
All defined constants are prefixed with
.Dv _PATH .
The constants include:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
The default user search path set by
.Xr login 1
and associated utilities such as
.Xr rshd 8 .
This is defined by
.Dv _PATH_DEFPATH
and includes directories such as
.Pa /usr/bin
and
.Pa /usr/local/bin .
.It
Default paths for some utilities and device nodes.
Examples include such paths as
.Pa /dev/null
.Pq Dv _PATH_DEVNULL ,
.Pa /dev/mem
.Pq Dv _PATH_MEM ,
and
.Pa /etc/nologin
.Pq Dv _PATH_NOLOGIN ,
among others.
.It
Paths for some default directories such as
.Pa /dev
.Pq Dv _PATH_DEV
and
.Pa /tmp
.Pq Dv _PATH_TMP
as well as paths for some miscellaneous utilities such as
.Xr csh 1 ,
.Pa /bin/csh
.Pq Dv _PATH_CSHELL .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr whereis 1 ,
.Xr sysexits 3 ,
.Xr types 3 ,
.Xr hier 7
.\"
.\" XXX: Fill this.
.\"
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.\" The
.\" .In paths.h
.\" header first appeared in
.\" .Bx ????
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.In paths.h
header is specific to
.Nx .
