.\"     $NetBSD: rbtree.3,v 1.2 2010/11/08 03:20:59 enami Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Matt Thomas, Niels Provos, and David Young.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 8, 2010
.Dt RBTREE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rbtree
.Nd red-black tree
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libc
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/rbtree.h
.Ft void
.Fn rb_tree_init "rb_tree_t *" "const rb_tree_ops_t *"
.Ft void *
.Fn rb_tree_insert_node "rb_tree_t *" "void *"
.Ft void
.Fn rb_tree_remove_node "rb_tree_t *" "void *"
.Ft void *
.Fn rb_tree_find_node "rb_tree_t *" "const void *"
.Ft void *
.Fn rb_tree_find_node_geq "rb_tree_t *" "const void *"
.Ft void *
.Fn rb_tree_find_node_leq "rb_tree_t *" "const void *"
.Ft void *
.Fn rb_tree_iterate "rb_tree_t *" "void *" "const unsigned int"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
provides red-black trees.
A red-black tree is a binary search tree with the node color as an
extra attribute.
It fulfills a set of conditions:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
Every search path from the root to a leaf consists of the same number of
black nodes.
.It
Each red node (except for the root) has a black parent.
.It
Each leaf node is black.
.El
.Pp
Every operation on a red-black tree is bounded as O(lg n).
The maximum height of a red-black tree is 2lg (n+1).
.Sh TYPES
.Bl -tag -width compact
.It Vt rb_tree_t
A red-black tree.
.It Vt typedef signed int \
(*const rbto_compare_nodes_fn)(void *, const void *, const void *);
The node-comparison operator.
Defines an ordering on nodes.
Returns a positive value if the first node precedes the second node.
Returns a negative value if the first node follows the second node.
Returns 0 if the first node and the second are identical according
to the ordering.
.It Vt typedef signed int \
(*const rbto_compare_key_fn)(void *, const void *, const void *);
The node-key comparison operator.
Defines the order of nodes and keys.
Returns a positive value if the node precedes the key.
Returns a negative value if the node follows the key.
Returns 0 if the node is identical to the key according to the ordering.
.It Vt rb_tree_ops_t
Defines the operator for comparing two nodes in the same tree,
the operator for comparing a node in the tree with a key,
the offset of member
.Vt rb_node_t
within a node,
and the opaque context passed to the operators.
Members of
.Vt rb_tree_ops_t
are
.Bd -literal
        rbto_compare_nodes_fn rbto_compare_nodes;
        rbto_compare_key_fn rbto_compare_key;
        size_t rbto_node_offset;
        void *rbto_context;
.Ed
.It Vt rb_node_t
A node in a red-black tree has this structure as a member.
.El
.Sh FUNCTIONS
.Bl -tag -width compact
.It Fn rb_tree_init "rbt" "ops"
Initialize the red-black tree
.Fa rbt .
Let the comparison operators given by
.Fa ops
define the order of nodes in the tree for
the purposes of insertion, search, and iteration.
.Fn rb_tree_init
always succeeds.
.It Fn rb_tree_insert_node "rbt" "rb"
Insert the node
.Fa rb
into the tree
.Fa rbt .
Return inserted node on success,
already existing node on failure.
.It Fn rb_tree_remove_node "rbt" "rb"
Remove the node
.Fa node
from the tree
.Fa rbt .
.It Fn rb_tree_find_node "rbt" "key"
Search the tree
.Fa rbt
for a node exactly matching
.Fa key .
If no such node is in the tree, return
.Dv NULL .
Otherwise, return the matching node.
.It Fn rb_tree_find_node_geq "rbt" "key"
Search the tree
.Fa rbt
for a node that exactly matches
.Fa key
and return it.
If no such node is present, return the first node following
.Fa key
or, if no such node is in the tree, return
.Dv NULL .
.It Fn rb_tree_find_node_leq "rbt" "key"
Search the tree
.Fa rbt
for a node that exactly matches
.Fa key
and return it.
If no such node is present, return the first node preceding
.Fa key
or, if no such node is in the tree, return
.Dv NULL .
.It Fn rb_tree_iterate "rbt" "rb" "direction"
If
.Fa direction
is
.Dv RB_DIR_LEFT ,
return the node in the tree
.Fa rbt
immediately preceding the node
.Fa rb
or, if
.Fa rb
is
.Dv NULL ,
return the last node in
.Fa rbt
or, if the tree is empty, return
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
If
.Fa direction
is
.Dv RB_DIR_RIGHT ,
return the node in the tree
.Fa rbt
immediately following the node
.Fa rb
or, if
.Fa rb
is
.Dv NULL ,
return the first node in
.Fa rbt
or, if the tree is empty, return
.Dv NULL .
.El
.Sh CODE REFERENCES
This section describes places within the
.Nx
source tree where actual code implementing
.Nm
can be found.
All pathnames are relative to
.Pa /usr/src .
.Pp
.Nm
is implemented within the file
.Pa common/lib/libc/gen/rb.c .
.\" .Sh EXAMPLES
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr queue 3 ,
.Xr tree 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
interface first appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Matt Thomas Aq matt@NetBSD.org
wrote
.Nm .
.Pp
.An Niels Provos Aq provos@citi.umich.edu
wrote the
.Xr tree 3
manual page.
Portions of this page derive from that page.
.\" .Sh CAVEATS
.\" .Sh BUGS
.\" .Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
