.\" $NetBSD: stddef.3,v 1.1 2010/03/21 12:27:51 jruoho Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Jukka Ruohonen.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 21, 2010
.Os
.Dt STDDEF 3
.Sh NAME
.Nm stddef
.Nd standard type definitions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In stddef.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.In stddef.h
header defines the following types and macros:
.Bl -enum -offset 4n
.It
.Vt ptrdiff_t ,
a signed integer type of the result of subtracting two pointers;
.It
.Vt size_t ,
an unsigned integer type of the result of the
.Fn sizeof
operator;
.It
.Vt wchar_t ,
an integer type whose range of values can represent distinct wide-character
codes for all members of the largest character set specified among the
supported locales: the null character has the code value 0 and each member
of the character set has a code value equal to its value when used
as the lone character in an integer character constant;
.It
.Vt NULL ,
which expands to an implementation-defined null pointer constant; and
.It
.Fn offsetof ,
a macro that expands to an integer constant as described in
.Xr offsetof 3 .
.El
.Pp
Some of the described types and macros may appear also in other headers.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr offsetof 3 ,
.Xr stdbool 3 ,
.Xr stdint 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.In stddef.h
header conforms to
.St -isoC-99
and
.St -p1003.1-2001 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.In stddef.h
header was introduced in
.Nx 0.8 ,
the first official release of
.Nx .
