.\" $NetBSD: typeof.3,v 1.1 2010/12/17 12:14:04 jruoho Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Jukka Ruohonen <jruohonen@iki.fi>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 17, 2010
.Dt TYPEOF 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm typeof
.Nd GNU extension for type of an expression
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ft type
.Fn typeof "expression"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn typeof
construct can be used to obtain the type of an expression.
The syntax is comparable to that of
.Fn sizeof ,
but semantically
.Fn typeof
operates like a type name defined with
.Em typedef .
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following is a typical example of a type-generic macro:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#define MAX(a, b) ({		\\
	typeof(a) _a = (a);	\\
	typeof(b) _b = (b);	\\
	_a > _b ? _a : _b;	\\
})
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gcc 1 ,
.Xr attribute 3 ,
.Xr offsetof 3
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Fn typeof
construct is a non-standard, compiler-specific extension.
