.\"	$NetBSD: uchar.3,v 1.2.2.2 2024/10/14 17:20:21 martin Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 15, 2024
.Dt UCHAR 3
.Os
.\"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.Sh NAME
.Nm uchar
.Nd Unicode utilities
.\"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In uchar.h
.\"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.In uchar.h
header file declares types and functions for manipulating Unicode code
units.
.\""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.Ss Types
.Bl -tag -width ".Vt char32_t"
.It Vt char8_t
(C23)
Unsigned integer type for UTF-8 code units.
.Pp
Same type as
.Vt unsigned char .
.It Vt char16_t
Unsigned integer type for UTF-16 code units.
.Pp
Same type as
.Vt uint_least16_t
from
.In stdint.h .
May represent both surrogate code points, i.e., code points in the
interval [0xd800,0xdfff], and Unicode scalar values in the Basic
Multilingual Plane, which are the 16-bit code points other than
surrogate code points.
.It Vt char32_t
Unsigned integer type for UTF-32 code units.
.Pp
Same type as
.Vt uint_least32_t
from
.In stdint.h .
Can represent all Unicode scalar values, not just those in the Basic
Multilingual Plane.
Intended to represent only Unicode scalar values, not surrogate code
points.
.It Vt mbstate_t
Opaque multibyte conversion state.
.Pp
Same type as in
.Vt stddef.h
and
.Vt wchar.h .
.It Vt size_t
Unsigned integer type to represent array sizes.
.Pp
Same type as in
.Vt stddef.h ,
.Vt stdint.h ,
and
.Vt sys/types.h .
.El
.\""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.Ss Functions
The
.In uchar.h
header file declares the functions
.Xr mbrtoc8 3 ,
.Xr c8rtomb 3 ,
.Xr mbrtoc16 3 ,
.Xr c16rtomb 3 ,
.Xr mbrtoc32 3 ,
and
.Xr c32rtomb 3
for conversion between multibyte sequences and UTF-8/UTF-16/UTF-32 code
units.
.\"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr c8rtomb 3 ,
.Xr c16rtomb 3 ,
.Xr c32rtomb 3 ,
.Xr mbrtoc8 3 ,
.Xr mbrtoc16 3 ,
.Xr mbrtoc32 3
.Rs
.%B The Unicode Standard
.%O Version 15.0 \(em Core Specification
.%Q The Unicode Consortium
.%D September 2022
.%U https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode15.0.0/UnicodeStandard-15.0.pdf
.Re
.Rs
.%A P. Hoffman
.%A F. Yergeau
.%T UTF-16, an encoding of ISO 10646
.%R RFC 2781
.%D February 2000
.%I Internet Engineering Task Force
.%U https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2781
.Re
.Rs
.%A F. Yergeau
.%T UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646
.%R RFC 3629
.%D November 2003
.%I Internet Engineering Task Force
.%U https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3629
.Re
.\"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.In uchar.h
header file conforms to
.St -isoC-2011
.\" .St -isoC-2023
.\" .\" XXX PR misc/58600: man pages lack C17, C23, C++98, C++03, C++11, C++17, C++20, C++23 citation syntax
and
.St -p1003.1-2024 .
.\"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
.Sh HISTORY
The
.In uchar.h
header file first appeared in
.Nx 11.0 .
