.\" $NetBSD: unistd.3,v 1.3 2011/04/12 04:27:02 jruoho Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Jukka Ruohonen <jruohonen@iki.fi>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 12, 2011
.Dt UNISTD 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm unistd
.Nd standard symbolic constants and types
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In unistd.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.In unistd.h
header forms the basis of the Portable Operating System Interface for Unix
.Pq Tn POSIX
.Tn API .
It includes definitions for numerous functions, symbolic constants, and types.
Among these are:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
The implementation-defined
.Dv NULL
pointer constant.
.It
Types such as
.Vt size_t ,
.Vt ssize_t ,
.Vt pid_t ,
and
.Vt intptr_t .
.It
Various limits and other symbolic constants described in
.Xr pathconf 2
and
.Xr sysconf 3 .
.It
Prototypes for several important system calls and library routines such as
.Xr chown 2 ,
.Xr dup 2 ,
.Xr execl 3 ,
.Xr fork 2 ,
.Xr pipe 2 ,
.Xr rmdir 2 ,
.Xr setuid 2 ,
and
.Xr write 2 .
.It
The symbolic constant
.Dv _POSIX_VERSION
that defines the version of the
.Tn POSIX
standard to which the implementation conforms.
.It
Various other
.Dv _POSIX
-prefixed symbolic constants that indicate whether
the system implements some optional part of the standard.
Examples include such constants as
.Dv _POSIX_IPV6
for
.Xr inet6 4
functionality and
.Dv _POSIX_ASYNCHRONOUS_IO
for
.Xr aio 3 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr stddef 3 ,
.Xr stdint 3 ,
.Xr stdlib 3 ,
.Xr types 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.In unistd.h
header conforms to
.St -p1003.1-2001 .
.\"
.\" XXX: fill this.
.\"
.\".Sh HISTORY
.\" A
.\" .In unistd.h
.\" header first appeared in
.\" ???
