.\" $NetBSD: cmos.4,v 1.3.20.1 2009/05/13 19:19:11 jym Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 David Young.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This manual page was written by David Young.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
.\" without modification, are permitted provided that the following
.\" conditions are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
.\"    copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"    disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials
.\"    provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. David Young's name may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior
.\"    written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY DAVID YOUNG ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
.\" THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
.\" PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL DAVID
.\" YOUNG BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
.\" EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
.\" ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd February 5, 2007
.Dt CMOS 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cmos
.Nd Read/write access to IBM PC/AT CMOS RAM
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd pseudo-device cmos
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Use
.Nm
to read the real-time clock and ISA configuration data from an
ISA-compatible CMOS RAM, and to write the ISA configuration data.
.Pp
A program reads between 0 and 48 bytes from the CMOS RAM, starting at
byte 0 of the RAM, using a single call to
.Xr read 2 .
Likewise, a program writes between 0 and 48 bytes to the CMOS RAM,
starting at byte 0 of the RAM, using a single call to
.Xr write 2 .
.Pp
.Nm
does not allow programs to overwrite the real-time clock data
(bytes 0 through 9), the status registers (10 through 13),
the diagnostic status or CMOS shutdown status (bytes 14 and 15),
or the CMOS checksum (bytes 46 and 47).
Writes to those bytes are ignored.
.Pp
On writes,
.Nm
recomputes the CMOS checksum and writes it to the CMOS RAM.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Display entire contents of CMOS RAM:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# dd if=/dev/cmos bs=48 count=1 | od -t x1
0000000   37  00  09  00  22  00  06  13  04  80  26  02  50  80  00  00
0000020   00  51  f0  00  01  80  02  00  fc  0f  2f  00  00  00  00  00
0000040   00  80  81  f0  ff  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  05  ee
0000060
.Ed
.Pp
Change boot order on Soekris net4521 to PXE ROM, Primary HDD,
Secondary HDD:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# dd if=/dev/cmos of=/tmp/cmos0 bs=48 count=1
1+0 records in
1+0 records out
48 bytes transferred in 0.001 secs (48000 bytes/sec)
# cp /tmp/cmos0 /tmp/cmos
# printf '\exf0\ex80\ex81\exff' | dd bs=1 seek=33 conv=notrunc of=/tmp/cmos
4+0 records in
4+0 records out
4 bytes transferred in 0.001 secs (4000 bytes/sec)
# dd if=/tmp/cmos of=/dev/cmos
0+1 records in
0+1 records out
48 bytes transferred in 0.001 secs (48000 bytes/sec)
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
A program can read or write no more than 48 bytes to
.Nm .
.Xr read 2
/
.Xr write 2
will return
.Er EINVAL
if more than 48 bytes are read / written at once.
.Sh AUTHORS
The original
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Takahiro Kambe Aq taca@back-street.net .
.An David Young Aq dyoung@NetBSD.org
modified the original and added it to
.Nx .
.\" .Sh BUGS
