.\" $NetBSD: installboot.old.8,v 1.9 1999/04/05 03:27:50 cgd Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996, 1997 Christopher G. Demetriou.  All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Paul Kranenburg
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by Paul Kranenburg.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 31, 1998
.Dt INSTALLBOOT.OLD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm installboot.old
.Nd install disk or CD-ROM bootstrap software
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm installboot.old
.Op Fl nv
.Op Fl b Ar bn
.Ar boot
.Ar bootxx
.Ar rawdiskdevice
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility prepares a disk for bootstrapping.
.Pp
The
.Nx Ns Tn /alpha
disk bootstrap software is split into two parts:
a small first-stage boot program that is written into the disklabel
area of a disk
.Po
and hence is limited in size to 7680 bytes
.Pc ,
and a second-stage boot program that resides in a FFS, ISO-9660, or USTAR
file system on a disk, CD-ROM image, or magnetic tape image,
.Po
typically with the name 
.Pa /boot
.Pc .
The first-stage boot program is loaded into memory by the SRM console
software.  After receiving control of the system, it loads the
second-stage boot program from a set of filesystem block numbers that
have been
hard-coded into it by
.Nm installboot.old .
The second-stage boot program locates and loads the kernel.
.Pp
The second-stage boot program and the prototype code for the
first-stage boot program can be found in
.Pa /usr/mdec/boot
and
.Pa /usr/mdec/bootxx ,
respectively.
.Pa /usr/mdec/boot
may be installed simply by copying it to the root directory of the
partition you wish to boot from, but after it is installed
.Nm
.Em must
be run.
.Pp
The options recognized by
.Nm
are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width -b\ bn
.It Fl n
Do not actually write anything on the disk.
.It Fl v
Verbose mode.
.It Fl b Ar bn
Ignore the file system type and assume that
.Pa boot
is contiguously present with initial block number
.Ar bn .
.El
.Pp
The arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width rawdiskdevice
.It Ar boot
The name of the second-stage boot program in the file system
where the first-stage boot program is to be installed.
.It Ar bootxx
The name of the prototype file for the first-stage boot program.
.It Ar rawdiskdevice
The name of the device corresponding to the raw whole-disk partition (the
.Dq raw partition )
of the disk on which the first-stage boot program is to be installed.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Assuming the second-stage boot program
.Pa boot
resides in the FFS file system mounted on
.Pa /
from
.Dq sd0a ,
you would install the first-stage boot program on the disk
(and therefore make the disk bootable) by using the command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
installboot.old /boot /usr/mdec/bootxx /dev/rsd0c
.Ed
.Pp
Assuming the second-stage boot program
.Pa boot
resides in the ISO-9660 file system mounted on
.Pa /mnt
from
.Dq vnd0a ,
you would install the first-stage boot progam into the CD-ROM image
(and therefore make the image bootable once burned onto a CD) by using
the command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
installboot.old /mnt/boot /usr/mdec/bootxx /dev/rvnd0c
.Ed
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nx Ns Tn /alpha
boot blocks can only load kernels from disks'
.Dq a
partitions.  (However, the second-stage boot
program may be located on any FFS file system partition
on the disk.)
.Pp
.Nm Installboot
requires simultaneous access to the mounted file system and
the disks' raw partition.
That is not allowed with the kernel
.Dv securelevel
variable
.Po
see
.Xr sysctl 8
.Pc
set to a value greater than one, or with
.Dv securelevel
set to one if the
.Dq boot
program resides in a file system on the disk's raw partition.
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr disklabel 8 ,
.Xr init 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nx Ns Tn /alpha
.Nm
command first appeared in
.Nx 1.2 .
