.\" $NetBSD: MAKEDEV.8,v 1.2 1999/04/06 04:39:56 cgd Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Christopher G. Demetriou.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by Christopher G. Demetriou
.\"      for the NetBSD Project.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)MAKEDEV.8	5.2 (Berkeley) 3/22/91
.\"
.Dd April 3, 1999
.Dt MAKEDEV 8 alpha
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm MAKEDEV ,
.Nm makedev
.Nd create system and device special files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm MAKEDEV
.Ar name
.Op Ar ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The shell script
.Nm MAKEDEV ,
found in the
.Pa /dev
directory, is used to create
the common special
files.
.\" See
.\" .Xr special 8
.\" for a more complete discussion of special files.
.Pp
.Nm MAKEDEV
takes any number of device names as arguments,
where the names are the common abbreviation for
the device.
.Pp
The
.Nx Ns Tn /alpha
.Nm
script supports the following special names.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 01234567 -compact
.It Ar all
All known devices for the
.Nx Ns Tn /alpha ,
including devices made with
.Dq local .
If units are expected for a device
.Nm MAKEDEV
supplies the standard numbers.
.It Ar local
Configuration specific devices, which are created by running the
.Pa MAKEDEV.local
shell script with the argument
.Dq all .
.It Ar minimal
A minimal set of device, for use on install disks, etc.
.It Ar std
The standard devices (console, drum, klog, kmem, mem, null, stderr, stdin,
stdout, tty, zero).
.It Ar usbs
All USB devices.
If units are expected for a device
.Nm MAKEDEV
supplies the standard numbers.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nx Ns Tn /alpha
.Nm
script supports the following device names.
Where a device name is followed by a hash
sign
.Pq Dq # ,
the hash sign must be replaced
by a unit number.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 01
.It Tape devices
. Bl -tag -width 01234567 -compact
. It Ar st#
SCSI tape drives
. El
.It Disk devices
. Bl -tag -width 01234567 -compact
. It Ar ccd#
Concatenated pseudo-disks
. It Ar cd#
ATAPI and SCSI CD-ROMs
. It Ar md#
Memory pseudo-disks
. It Ar raid#
RAIDframe pseudo-disks
. It Ar sd#
ATAPI and SCSI disks
. It Ar vnd#
File pseudo-disks
. It Ar wd#
IDE disks
. It Ar fd#
PC-style floppy disks
. El
.It Terminals
. Bl -tag -width 01234567 -compact
. It Ar ttyB#
DEC 3000 ZS8530
. Dq scc
serial ports
. It Ar ttyC#
AlphaStation NS16550
. Dq com
serial ports
. It Ar ttyE#
Workstation console
. Dq wscons
glass-tty emulators
. El
.It Pseudo terminals
. Bl -tag -width 01234567 -compact
. It Ar pty#
Set of 16 master and slave pseudo terminals
. El
.It Printers
. Bl -tag -width 01234567 -compact
. It Ar lpt#
PC Parallel port driver
.Pq Dq lpt
units
. It Ar lpa#
Polled PC Parallel port driver
.Pq Dq lpt
units
. El
.It USB devices
. Bl -tag -width 01234567 -compact
. It Ar usb#
Bus control devices used by
.Xr usbd 8
. It Ar uhid#
USB generic HID devices
. It Ar ulpt#
USB printer devices
. It Ar ugen#
USB generic devices
. El
.It Special purpose devices
. Bl -tag -width 01234567 -compact
. It Ar audio#
Audio devices
. It Ar bpf#
Berkeley Packet Filter devices
. It Ar ch#
SCSI media changers
. It Ar fd
File descriptors
.Pq Pa /dev/fd/* .
. It Ar ipl
IP filter
. It Ar kbd
Keyboard (provides events, for X11)
. It Ar lkm
Loadable kernel modules interface
. It Ar mouse
Mouse (provides events, for X11)
. It Ar random
Random number generator
. It Ar satlink#
PlanetConnect satellite receiver driver
. It Ar scsibus#
SCSI busses
. It Ar speaker
PC speaker (IBM BASIC playstring emulation)
. It Ar ss#
SCSI scanners
. It Ar tun#
Network tunnel driver
. It Ar uk#
Unknown SCSI devices
. El
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev -compact
.It Pa /dev
The special file directory.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr config 8 ,
.Xr mknod 8
.\" .Xr special 8
.Sh BUGS
This manual page was created from the list at the top of the
.Nx Ns Tn /alpha
shell script.  That script's comments may be incorrect, and
this manual page must be kept in sync with them, so it may be
even more incorrect.  At the very least, the ordering of device
names in that file seems almost random.
