.\"     $NetBSD: intro.4,v 1.4 2003/05/06 07:43:14 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 29, 2003
.Dt INTRO 4 arc
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm intro
.Nd introduction to special files and hardware support
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This section describes the special files, related driver functions,
and networking support available in the system.
In this part of the manual, the
.Tn SYNOPSIS
section of each configurable device gives a sample specification
for use in constructing a system description for the
.Xr config 8
program.
The
.Tn DIAGNOSTICS
section lists messages which may appear on the console
and/or in the system error log
.Pa /var/log/messages
due to errors in device operation; see
.Xr syslogd 8
for more information.
.Pp
This section contains both devices which may be configured into
the system and network related information.
The networking support is introduced in
.Xr netintro 4 .
.Sh DEVICE SUPPORT
This section describes the hardware supported by
.Nx Ns /arc .
Software support for these devices comes in two forms.
A hardware device may be supported with a character or block
.Em device driver ,
or it may be used within the networking subsystem and have a
.Em network interface driver .
Block and character devices are accessed through files in the file
system of a special type; see
.Xr mknod 8 .
Network interfaces are indirectly accessed through the interprocess
communication facilities provided by the system; see
.Xr socket 2 .
.Pp
A hardware device is identified to the system at configuration time
and the appropriate device or network interface driver is then
compiled into the system.
When the resultant system is booted, the autoconfiguration facilities
in the system probe for the device and, if found, enable the software
support for it.
If a device does not respond at autoconfiguration time it is not
accessible at any time afterwards.
To enable a device which did not autoconfigure, the
system must be rebooted.
.Pp
The autoconfiguration system is described in
.Xr autoconf 4 .
A list of the supported devices is given below.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr autoconf 4 ,
.Xr config 8
.Sh HARDWARE
.Nx Ns /arc
supports a variety of systems conforming to the ARC machine
specification.
The following systems are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XXXXXX -offset indent -compact
.It Acer PICA
.It DESKstation rPC44
.It DESKstation Tyne
.It MIPS Magnum 4000
.It NEC Express 5800/230 PCI R4K
.It NEC Express 5800/240 EISA R4K
.It NEC Express RISCserver
.It NEC ImageRISCstation
.It NEC RISCserver 2200
.It NEC RISCstation 2200 EISA
.It NEC RISCstation 2200 PCI
.It NEC RISCstation 2250
.El
.Sh LIST OF DEVICES
The devices listed below are supported in this incarnation of the
system.
Devices are indicated by their functional interface.
Not all supported devices are listed.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width jazzisabr -offset indent -compact
.It arcsisabr
DESKstation rPC44 ISA host bridge
.It jazzio
Jazz internal bus host bridge
.It jazzisabr
Jazz ISA/EISA bus bridge
.It necpb
NEC RISCstation PCI host bridge
.It tyneisabr
DESKstation Tyne ISA host bridge
.El
.Pp
The following devices on the Jazz internal bus are supported.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width mcclock -offset indent -compact
.It asc
NCR 53c9x-based SCSI interface
.It com
NS16550-based serial communications interface
.It fdc
Floppy disk controller
.It lpt
Parallel port
.It mcclock
DS1287 real-time clock
.It oosiop
Symbios/NCR 53c700-based SCSI interface
.It osiop
Symbios/NCR 53c710-based SCSI interface
.It pckbc
PC keyboard controller
.It sn
SONIC Ethernet
.It timer
Interval timer
.It vga
VGA graphics
.El
.Pp
PCI devices are supported through the
.Xr pci 4
bus and associated device drivers.
.Pp
ISA devices are supported through the
.Xr isa 4
bus and associated device drivers.
.Pp
.\"EISA devices are supported through the
.\".Xr eisa 4
.\"bus and associated device drivers.
.\".Pp
Console devices using ISA, Jazzio, or PCI video adaptors and standard AT
or PS/2 keyboards are supported by the machine independent
.Xr wscons 4
console driver.
.Sh UNSUPPORTED DEVICES
The following devices are not supported, due to unavailability of
either documentation or sample hardware:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XXXXXX -offset indent -compact
.It AD1848 audio on Jazzio
.It EISA devices
.It VXL framebuffer on MIPS Magnum and RISCstation 2200 EISA
.El
.Sh HISTORY
This
.Tn arc
.Nm intro
appeared in
.Nx 2.0 .
.Sh BUGS
DESKstation rPC44 and Tyne support is currently broken.
