.\" $NetBSD: acpipmtr.4,v 1.1 2011/01/05 20:08:13 jruoho Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Jukka Ruohonen <jruohonen@iki.fi>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 22, 2010
.Dt ACPIPMTR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpipmtr
.Nd ACPI Power Meter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "acpipmtr* at acpi?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides support for
.Dq power meters .
These are sensors that approximate the current
power consumption of the system.
Alternatively, a power meter may measure also the power gain
when the system is connected to an external power supply.
.Pp
The available information (namely, the power consumption)
is made available through the
.Xr envsys 4
.Tn API
and the
.Xr envstat 8
command.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr acpibat 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jukka Ruohonen
.Aq jruohonen@iki.fi
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver is experimental.
