.\" $NetBSD: acpivga.4,v 1.1.2.3 2010/11/06 08:05:44 uebayasi Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 28, 2010
.Dt ACPIVGA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpivga
.Nd ACPI Display Adapter and Output Devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "acpivga* at acpi?"
.Cd "acpiout* at acpivga?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides generic support for brightness control and output switching,
through
.Tn ACPI
video extensions.
The
.Tn ACPI
specification requires that systems containing a built-in display adapter
implement these extensions in their
.Tn ACPI
BIOS.
.Pp
The driver handles brightness hotkeys and display switch hotkeys.
In addition, the following
.Xr sysctl 8
read/write variables are provided (when hardware support is available):
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va hw.acpi.acpivga0.bios_switch
BIOS output switching policy.
This boolean variable controls the behavior of the BIOS when a display
switch hotkey is pressed.
.Bl -tag -width xxx -compact
.It Sy 1
the BIOS should automatically switch outputs, with no interaction from
.Nm .
.It Sy 0
the BIOS should only notify
.Nm
of the desired output state changes.
.El
.It Va hw.acpi.acpiout0.brightness
Brightness level.
This integer variable typically ranges from 0 to 100, but any integer value
is accepted (the driver uses the closest brightness level supported by the
device).
.El
.Pp
Please note, however, that future versions of
.Nm
may remove these
.Xr sysctl 8
variables without prior notice.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr vga 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Rs
.%A Microsoft Corporation
.%D December 4, 2001
.%T Mobile System Displays and Windows
.%N Version 1.2c
.%U http://www.microsoft.com/whdc/archive/mobiledisplay.mspx
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Gr\('egoire Sutre
.Aq gsutre@NetBSD.org
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver only supports PCI/PCI-X/PCI-E display adapters.
.Pp
Many
.Tn ACPI
BIOSes implement only part of the
.Tn ACPI
video extensions.
In particular, display output switching via these extensions often does not
work.
For this reason,
.Nm
enables
.Va hw.acpi.acpivga0.bios_switch
by default.
If the display switch hotkey does not work with this default setting, try
setting
.Va hw.acpi.acpivga0.bios_switch
to 0.
.Pp
Brightness level should be controlled via
.Xr wsconsctl 8
instead of
.Xr sysctl 8 .
