.\" $NetBSD
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Jukka Ruohonen <jruohonen@iki.fi>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 9, 2011
.Dt ACPIFAN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm acpifan
.Nd ACPI Fan
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "acpifan* at acpi?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports fans possibly exposed by the
.Tn BIOS .
Even if a system contains only one physical fan, multiple
.Nm
instances may be present.
In such cases each
.Nm
typically represents an
.Xr acpitz 4
thermal zone, and the combined state of all
instances reveals the speed of the fan.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver does not support controlling the fan.
The current state (on or off) is made available through the
.Xr envsys 4
.Tn API
and the
.Xr envstat 8
command.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr acpitz 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jukka Ruohonen
.Aq jruohonen@iki.fi
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver does not yet support additional functionality introduced in the
.Tn ACPI
4.0 specification.
