.\"	$NetBSD: ahcisata.4,v 1.7 2017/10/07 17:35:48 jdolecek Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Manuel Bouyer.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 7, 2017
.Dt AHCISATA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ahcisata
.Nd AHCI 1.0 and 1.1 compliant SATA controllers driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ahcisata* at pci? dev ? function ? flags 0x0000"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports SATA controllers compliant with the Serial ATA Advanced
Host Controller Interface Revision 1.0 or 1.1 specification,
and provides the interface to the hardware for the
.Xr ata 4
driver.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver will only attach if the controller has been put in AHCI mode by the
BIOS; if the controller is in pciide-compatible mode, it will be handled
by the appropriate driver
.Xr ( piixide 4
for Intel AHCI controllers).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ata 4 ,
.Xr atapi 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr pciide 4 ,
.Xr wd 4 ,
.Xr wdc 4
.Rs
.%A Intel Corporation
.%T Serial ATA Advanced Host Controller Interface (AHCI)
.%N Revision 1.3
.%D June 26, 2008
.%U http://download.intel.com/technology/serialata/pdf/rev1_3.pdf
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
NCQ support was added
in
.Nx
on October 7, 2017 by
.An Jaromir Dolecek Aq Mt jdolecek@NetBSD.org .
