.\"	$NetBSD: alc.4,v 1.3.18.1 2015/02/04 06:24:58 snj Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Kevin Lo <kevlo@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd January 18, 2015
.Dt ALC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm alc
.Nd Atheros AR813x/AR815x/AR816x/AR817x Ethernet device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "alc* at pci?"
.Cd "atphy* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Ethernet interfaces based on the
Atheros AR813x/AR815x/AR816x/AR817x Gigabit/Fast Ethernet chipsets.
.Pp
The following
.Ar media
types are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width autoselect -compact
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
.It Cm 10baseT
Set 10Mbps operation.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
.It Cm 1000baseT
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr atphy 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Pyun YongHyeon
and first appeared in
.Fx 8.0 . It was ported to
.Ox 4.7
by
.An Kevin Lo
and then ported to
.Nx 6.0
by
.An Fire Crow .
.An Leonardo Taccari
ported the AR816x/AR817x support for
.Nm
from
.Fx 11.0 .
