.\"	$NetBSD: bge.4,v 1.15.18.1 2019/03/07 17:22:19 martin Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Matthias Scheler <tron@NetBSD.org>.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd February 20, 2019
.Dt BGE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bge
.Nd Broadcom BCM57xx/BCM590x 10/100/Gigabit Ethernet driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "bge* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Pp
Configuration of PHYs may also be necessary.
See
.Xr mii 4 .
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for various NICs based on the Broadcom BCM570x,
571x, 572x, 575x, 576x, 578x, 5776x and 5778x Gigabit Ethernet controller
chips and the 590x and 5779x Fast Ethernet controller chips,
including the following:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
3Com 3c996-T (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
3Com 3c996-SX (1000baseSX)
.It
3Com 3c996B-T (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
Allied-Telesis AT-2972LX10/LC
.It
Dell PowerEdge 1750 integrated BCM5704C NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
Dell PowerEdge 2550 integrated BCM5700 NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
Dell PowerEdge 2650 integrated BCM5703 NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
Fujitsu PRIMEPOWER 250/450 LAN (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
Fujitsu PW0G8GE1U (1000baseSX)
.It
Fujitsu PW0G8GE2U (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
Fujitsu PW008GE4 (1000baseSX)
.It
Fujitsu PW008GE5 (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
Fujitsu PW008QG1U (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC320T PCI-E Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC320m PCI-E Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC331T PCI-E Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC332T PCI-E Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC370F PCI-X Gigabit NIC (1000baseSX)
.It
HP ProLiant NC370T PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC1020 PCI Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC6770 PCI-X Gigabit NIC (1000baseSX)
.It
HP ProLiant NC7760 embedded PCI Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC7770 PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC7771 PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC7780 embedded PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC7781 embedded PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
HP ProLiant NC7782 embedded PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
IBM ThinkPad T43/T43p integrated BCM5751M NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
IBM xSeries 235 integrated BCM5703X NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
IBM xSeries 305 integrated BCM5703X NIC (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
Netgear GA302T (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
SysKonnect SK-9D21 (10/100/1000baseT)
.It
SysKonnect SK-9D41 (1000baseSX)
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports IPv4 IP, TCP, and UDP checksum offload for receive,
IP checksum offload for transmit, VLAN tag insertion and stripping,
as well as a 256-bit multicast hash filter.
The BCM5717, BCM5718, BCM5723, BCM5754, BCM5755, BCM5761, BCM5762, BCM5764,
BCM5784, BCM5785, BCM5787 and BCM577xx chips also support IPv6 receive TCP/UDP
checksum offload.
The
.Nm
driver supports this feature of the chip.
See
.Xr ifconfig 8
for information on how to enable this feature.
.Pp
The BCM5700, BCM5701, BCM5702, BCM5703, BCM5704, BCM5714, BCM5717, BCM5719,
BCM5720, BCM5762, BCM5780, BCM57765 and BCM57766 also support jumbo frames,
which can be configured via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit Jumbo frames.
.Pp
The level of interrupt mitigation for received packets can be adjusted
with the
.Li hw.bge.rx_lvl
.Xr sysctl 8
control.
A value of 1 yields a
.Nm
interrupt for every two full-sized Ethernet frames.
Each increment of the value will, roughly, halve receive interrupt rate,
up to a maximum of 5, which interrupts about every 30 to 40 full-sized
TCP segments.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width 1000baseSX
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to the appropriate
.Xr ifconfig.if 5
file.
.It Cm 10baseT
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Ic mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Ic mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 1000baseT
Set 1000baseT operation over twisted pair.
Both
.Cm full-duplex
and
.Cm half-dupex
modes are supported.
.It Cm 1000baseSX
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation.
Both
.Cm full-duplex
and
.Cm half-duplex
modes are supported.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width full-duplex
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "bge%d: can't find mem space"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "bge%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "bge%d: watchdog timeout -- resetting"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr brgphy 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr mii 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.6.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul
.Aq wpaul@windriver.com
for
.Fx
and ported to
.Nx
by
.An Frank van der Linden
.Aq fvdl@wasabisystems.com ,
.An Jason R. Thorpe
.Aq thorpej@wasabisystems.com
and
.An Jonathan Stone
.Aq jonathan@dsg.stanford.edu .
