.\" $NetBSD: bthset.4,v 1.1 2006/06/19 15:44:36 gdamore Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Itronix Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Written by Iain Hibbert for Itronix Inc.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of Itronix Inc. may not be used to endorse
.\"    or promote products derived from this software without specific
.\"    prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY ITRONIX INC. ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL ITRONIX INC. BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
.\" ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd May 17, 2006
.Dt BTHSET 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bthset
.Nd Bluetooth headset support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "bthset*	at bthub?"
.Cd "audio*	at audiobus?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Bluetooth Headsets, and only supports
playing and recording of 8kHz, 16-bit, 1 channel, signed linear samples.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver must be configured at run time with the
.Xr btcontrol 8
program and provides system access through the
.Xr audio 4
driver. In order to utilise the resulting audio device, the
user should first open a control channel to the headset with the
.Xr bthset 1
utility, which uses the
.Dv BTHSET_GETINFO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
to return a
.Ar bthset_info
structure as follows with information needed to set up the
control channel:
.Bd -literal -offset
#include <dev/bluetooth/bthset.h>

struct bthset_info {
	bdaddr_t	laddr;		/* controller bdaddr */
	bdaddr_t	raddr;		/* headset bdaddr */
	uint8_t		channel;	/* RFCOMM channel */
	int		vgs;		/* mixer index speaker */
	int		vgm;		/* mixer index mic */
};
.Ed
.Sh CAVEATS
Isochronous data is seemingly not well supported over USB in the current system
and to get a headset working, you will have to do some research and fine tuning.
.Pp
Look at
.Xr ubt 4
with regards to the
.Xr sysctl 8
settings. Then, you will have to calculate the MTU that the
driver will use. This should be less than the sco_mtu reported by the
.Xr btconfig 8
program, and when combined with the SCO header (3 bytes) should fit exactly into
an integer number of frames, where the frame size is indicated by hw.ubtN.sco_txsize.
.Pp
For example. I want one voice channel (which is all that is supported,
for now) so am using configuration number 2, with a frame length of 17
bytes. My USB dongle says the maximum SCO payload is 64 bytes, so I am
using an MTU of 48 bytes (17 * 3 - 3 = 48).
.Pp
Specify the MTU when you attach the headset with
.Xr btcontrol 8 
and all should be well.
.Pp
The failure mode is that the USB Bluetooth dongle locks
up and requires removal/reinsertion to clear.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr bluetooth 4 ,
.Xr btcontrol 8 ,
.Xr bthub 4 ,
.Xr ioctl 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver
was written for 
.Nx 4.0
by
.An Iain Hibbert
under the sponsorship of Itronix, Inc.
