.\" $NetBSD: bthub.4,v 1.1 2006/06/19 15:44:36 gdamore Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Itronix Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Written by Iain Hibbert for Itronix Inc.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of Itronix Inc. may not be used to endorse
.\"    or promote products derived from this software without specific
.\"    prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY ITRONIX INC. ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL ITRONIX INC. BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
.\" ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 3, 2006
.Dt BTHUB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bthub
.Nd Bluetooth Remote Device hub
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pseudo-device bthub"
.Pp
.Cd "bthidev* at bthub?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
pseudo-device is used to attach remote Bluetooth devices to the system
and lays atop the Bluetooth protocol stack, see
.Xr bluetooth 4 .
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Normally, Bluetooth Remote Devices will be configured using the
.Xr btcontrol 8
program, which uses the following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls made on the
.Nm
control file
.Pa /dev/bthubctl .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XX -compact
.It Cm BTDEV_ATTACH
Attach Bluetooth Device. This takes as argument the following
structure:
.Bd -literal -offset
#include <dev/bluetooth/btdev.h>

struct btdev_attach_args {
	bdaddr_t	bd_laddr;	/* local address */
	bdaddr_t	bd_raddr;	/* remote address */
	uint16_t	bd_type;	/* device type */

	union {
		struct {	/* HID arguments */
			uint16_t  bthid_flags;/* hid flags */
			uint16_t  bthid_ctl;  /* control PSM */
			uint16_t  bthid_int;  /* interrupt PSM */
			void	 *bthid_desc; /* HID descriptor */
			uint16_t  bthid_dlen; /* descriptor length */
		} bdd_hid;
		struct {
		} bdd_hset;
	} bdd;
};

#define	bd_hid	bdd.bdd_hid

/* btdev type */
#define BTDEV_HID		0x0001
#define BTDEV_HSET		0x0002

/* bthid flags */
#define BTHID_INITIATE		(1 << 0)	/* normally initiate */
#define BTHID_CONNECT		(1 << 1)	/* initiate connect */
.Ed
.Pp
.It Cm BTHID_DETACH
Detach Bluetooth Device. This takes as argument the Bluetooth device address
.Ar bdaddr_t
matching the device to be detached.
.Pp
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -compact
.It Pa /dev/bthubctl
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bluetooth 4 ,
.Xr btcontrol 8 ,
.Xr bthidev 4 ,
.Xr bthset 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Iain Hibbert
under the sponsorship of Itronix, Inc. and first appeared in
.Nx 4.0 .
