.\" $NetBSD: ena.4,v 1.2 2018/12/02 10:06:45 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015-2017 Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 1, 2018
.Dt ENA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ena
.Nd NetBSD kernel driver for Elastic Network Adapter (ENA) family
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ena* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The ENA is a networking interface designed to make good use of modern CPU
features and system architectures.
.Pp
The ENA device exposes a lightweight management interface with a
minimal set of memory mapped registers and extendable command set
through an Admin Queue.
.Pp
The driver supports a range of ENA devices, is link-speed independent
(i.e., the same driver is used for 10GbE, 25GbE, 40GbE, etc.), and has
a negotiated and extendable feature set.
.Pp
Some ENA devices support SR-IOV.
This driver is used for both the
SR-IOV Physical Function (PF) and Virtual Function (VF) devices.
.Pp
The ENA devices enable high speed and low overhead network traffic
processing by providing multiple Tx/Rx queue pairs (the maximum number
is advertised by the device via the Admin Queue), a dedicated MSI-X
interrupt vector per Tx/Rx queue pair, and CPU cacheline optimized
data placement.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports industry standard TCP/IP offload features such
as checksum offload and TCP transmit segmentation offload (TSO).
Receive-side scaling (RSS) is supported for multi-core scaling.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver and its corresponding devices implement health
monitoring mechanisms such as watchdog, enabling the device and driver
to recover in a manner transparent to the application, as well as
debug logs.
.Pp
Some of the ENA devices support a working mode called Low-latency
Queue (LLQ), which saves several more microseconds.
This feature might be implemented for the driver in future releases.
.Sh HARDWARE
Supported PCI vendor ID/device IDs:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
1d0f:0ec2 - ENA PF
.It
1d0f:1ec2 - ENA PF with LLQ support
.It
1d0f:ec20 - ENA VF
.It
1d0f:ec21 - ENA VF with LLQ support
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was originally written by
.An Semihalf
for
.Fx .
The driver was ported to
.Nx
by
.An Jared D. McNeill Aq Mt jmcneill@NetBSD.org .
