.\"	$NetBSD: envsys.4,v 1.29.4.2 2008/01/09 01:39:07 matt Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Juan Romero Pardines.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 13, 2007
.Dt ENVSYS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm envsys
.Nd Environmental Systems framework (version 2)
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/envsys.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
framework provides support to handle hardware monitor devices.
Hardware monitoring chips are able to report values from different types of
sensors.
.Pp
The
.Nm
framework consists of two parts:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
the userland part, to receive the current sensor data and
to set some properties on sensors:
.Xr envstat 8 .
.It
The kernel part that is able to talk to the drivers providing sensor
data:
.Xr sysmon_envsys 9 .
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
framework uses
.Xr proplib 3
for communication between kernel and user space.
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
types are available:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XX -compact
.It Dv ENVSYS_GETDICTIONARY Pq prop_dictionary_t
.Pp
This
.Xr ioctl 2
is used to receive the global dictionary that is being used in
the kernel by the
.Xr sysmon_envsys 9
framework.
It will contain an array of dictionaries per device
and one dictionary per sensor plus another special dictionary that
contains the properties for a device.
Each sensor dictionary will have their own characteristics and values.
.Pp
The following XML property list represents a virtual device
.Dq device0
with one sensor
.Dq sensor0
and all available properties set on it, plus another sensor for
the
.Dq device-properties
dictionary (which contains specific properties for a device):
.Pp
.Bd -literal
\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]device0\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
\&\*[Lt]array\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]dict\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]allow-rfact\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]true\&/\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]avg-value\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]36400\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]battery-capacity\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]string\&\*[Gt]NORMAL\&\*[Lt]\&/string\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]critical-capacity\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]21417\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]critical-max\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]343150000\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]critical-min\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]288150000\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]cur-value\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]406000\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]description\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]string\&\*[Gt]CPU Temp\&\*[Lt]\&/string\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]string\&\*[Gt]index\&\*[Lt]\&/string\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]string\&\*[Gt]sensor0\&\*[Lt]\&/string\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]max-value\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]3894000\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]min-value\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]2894000\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]monitoring-state-critical\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]true\&/\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]monitoring-state-critover\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]true\&/\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]monitoring-state-critunder\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]true\&/\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]monitoring-state-state-changed\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]true\&/\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]monitoring-state-warnover\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]true\&/\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]monitoring-state-warnunder\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]true\&/\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]monitoring-supported\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]true\&/\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]state\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]string\&\*[Gt]valid\&\*[Lt]\&/string\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]type\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]string\&\*[Gt]Ampere hour\&\*[Lt]\&/string\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]want-percentage\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]true\&/\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]\&/dict\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]dict\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]device-properties\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]dict\&\*[Gt]
			\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]refresh-timeout\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
			\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]0xa\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]\&/dict\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]\&/dict\&\*[Gt]
\&\*[Lt]\&/array\&\*[Gt]
.Ed
.Pp
Let's explain some more about those objects:
.Bl -tag -width "monitoring-state-critical-overxx"
.It Fa allow-rfact
Set to
.Em true
mean that the sensor is able to change the resistor factor,
only used in Voltage sensors.
.It Fa avg-value
Current average value in the sensor.
.It Fa battery-capacity
Current capacity state for a battery capacity sensor.
.It Fa critical-capacity
Critical capacity set previously by the
.Dv ENVSYS_SETDICTIONARY
.Xr ioctl 2 .
Only available on sensors with the
.Em want-percentage
object enabled.
.It Fa critical-max
Critical max limit set previously by the
.Dv ENVSYS_SETDICTIONARY
.Xr ioctl 2 .
.It Fa critical-min
Critical min limit set previously by the
.Dv ENVSYS_SETDICTIONARY
.Xr ioctl 2 .
.It Fa cur-value
Current value in the sensor.
.It Fa description
Description of the sensor.
.It Fa index
Index position of the sensor.
.It Fa max-value
Current max value in the sensor.
.It Fa min-value
Current min value in the sensor.
.It Fa monitoring-state-critical
If true, the driver has enabled the flag to monitor a critical state.
.It Fa monitoring-state-critical-over
If true, the driver has enabled the flag to monitor a critical over state.
.It Fa monitoring-state-critical-under
If true, the driver has enabled the flag to monitor a critical under state.
.It Fa monitoring-state-state-changed
If true, the driver has enabled the flag to monitor for state changes in
a drive or Battery state sensor.
.It Fa monitoring-state-warning-over
If true, the driver has enabled the flag to monitor a warning over state.
.It Fa monitoring-state-warning-under
If true, the driver has enabled the flag to monitor a warning under state.
.It Fa monitoring-supported
If true, critical capacity/max/min limits may be set by the
.Dv ENVSYS_SETDICTIONARY
.Xr ioctl 2 .
.It Fa state
Current state in the sensor.
.It Fa type
Type of unit in the sensor.
.It Fa want-percentage
If true,
.Em max-value
and
.Em cur-value
are valid and a percentage may be computed from them.
.El
.El
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width XX -compact
.It Dv ENVSYS_REMOVEPROPS Pq prop_dictionary_t
.Pp
This
.Xr ioctl 2
is used to remove all properties that are currently set via the
.Dv ENVSYS_SETDICTIONARY
ioctl.
The values will be set to defaults, the ones that the driver uses.
.Pp
Only one object is allowed on this dictionary:
.Bd -literal -offset -ident
	\*[Lt]key\*[Gt]envsys-remove-props\*[Lt]/key\*[Gt]
	\*[Lt]true/\*[Gt]
.Ed
.Pp
It is a boolean object and must be set to
.Em true
to be effective.
.El
.Bl -tag -width XX -compact
.Pp
.It Dv ENVSYS_SETDICTIONARY Pq prop_dictionary_t
.Pp
This
.Xr ioctl 2
is used to send a dictionary with new properties that should be
processed by the
.Nm
framework.
Only a set of predefined keywords are recognized by the kernel part.
The following is the property list representation
of a dictionary with all recognized and required keywords that
a sensor understands:
.Bd -literal
\&\*[Lt]dict\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]description\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]string\&\*[Gt]cpu temp\&\*[Lt]\&/string\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]rfact\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]56000\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]critical-capacity\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]10\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]critical-max\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]3400\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]critical-min\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]2800\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
\&\*[Lt]\&/dict\&\*[Gt]
.Ed
.Pp
Also if some properties in a device need to be changed, the
.Dq device-properties
dictionary must be used.
At this moment only the
.Dq refresh-timeout
property is understood.
This has the following structure:
.Bd -literal
\&\*[Lt]dict\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]device-properties\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]dict\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]refresh-timeout\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]integer\&\*[Gt]0xa\&\*[Lt]\&/integer\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]\&/dict\&\*[Gt]
\&\*[Lt]\&/dict\&\*[Gt]
.Ed
.Pp
A dictionary sent to the kernel with this
.Xr ioctl 2
should have the following structure:
.Bd -literal
\&\*[Lt]dict\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]device_name\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
	\&\*[Lt]array\&\*[Gt]
		\&\*[Lt]dict\&\*[Gt]
			\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]index\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
			\&\*[Lt]string\&\*[Gt]sensor0\&\*[Lt]\&/string\&\*[Gt]
			\&\*[Lt]key\&\*[Gt]description\&\*[Lt]\&/key\&\*[Gt]
			\&\*[Lt]string\&\*[Gt]cpu temp\&\*[Lt]\&/string\&\*[Gt]
			...
			Another property for this sensor
			...
		\&\*[Lt]\&/dict\&\*[Gt]
		...
		Another dictionary for device-properties or sensor
		...
	\&\*[Lt]\&/array\&\*[Gt]
	...
	Another device as above
	...
\&\*[Lt]\&/dict\&\*[Gt]
.Ed
.Pp
The named device will be an array and will contain dictionaries,
any dictionary needs to have the
.Em index
object specifying the sensor that is required for the new properties.
.Pp
If an unknown object was sent with the dictionary,
.Er EINVAL
will be returned, or if the sensor does not support changing
rfact (voltage sensors) or critical/capacity limits,
.Er ENOTSUP
will be returned.
.El
.Sh NOTES
When setting a critical max or min limit with the
.Dv ENVSYS_SETDICTIONARY
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
the user must be aware that
.Xr sysmon_envsys 9
expects to have a proper unit, so the value must be converted.
Please see
.Xr sysmon_envsys 9
for more information.
.Pp
Also when setting a critical capacity limit, the formula to send a
proper value to
.Xr sysmon_envsys 9
is the following:
.Em value = (value / 100) * max value .
The max value is available in the sensor's dictionary.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example shows how to change the description
of
.Ql sensor0
in the
.Ql aiboost0
device with the
.Dv ENVSYS_SETDICTIONARY
.Xr ioctl 2 :
.Bd -literal
int
main(void)
{
	prop_dictionary_t global_dict, sensor_dict;
	prop_array_t array;
	prop_object_t obj;
	int fd;

	global_dict = prop_dictionary_create();
	sensor_dict = prop_dictionary_create();
	array = prop_array_create();

	if (!prop_dictionary_set(global_dict, "aiboost0", array))
		err(EINVAL, "prop_dictionary_set global");

	obj = prop_string_create_cstring_nocopy("sensor0");
	if (obj == NULL ||
	    !prop_dictionary_set(dict, "index", obj))
		err(EINVAL, "sensor index");

	prop_object_release(obj);

	/* new description */
	obj = prop_string_create_cstring_nocopy("CPU temp");
	if (obj == NULL ||
	    !prop_dictionary_set(dict, "description", obj))
		err(EINVAL, "new description");

	prop_object_release(obj);

	if (!prop_array_add(array, sensor_dict))
		err(EINVAL, "prop_array_add");

	if ((fd = open(_DEV_SYSMON, O_RDWR)) == \-1)
		err(EXIT_FAILURE, "open")

	/* we are done, send the dictionary */
	error = prop_dictionary_send_ioctl(global_dict,
					   fd,
					   ENVSYS_SETDICTIONARY);
	prop_object_release(array);
	prop_object_release(global_dict);
	(void)close(fd);
	return error;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr powerd 8 ,
.Xr sysmon_envsys 9
.Sh HISTORY
The first
.Em envsys
framework first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
The
.Em envsys 2
framework first appeared in
.Nx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The (current)
.Em envsys 2
framework was implemented by
.An Juan Romero Pardines .
Additional input on the design was provided by many
.Nx
developers around the world.
.Pp
The first
.Em envsys
framework was implemented by Jason R. Thorpe, Tim Rightnour,
and Bill Squier.
