.\"	$NetBSD: esiop.4,v 1.1 2002/04/23 19:38:58 bouyer Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Manuel Bouyer.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd Apr 23, 2002
.Dt ESIOP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm esiop
.Nd Enhanced Symbios Logic/NCR 53c8xx SCSI driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "esiop* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Cd "options SIOP_SYMLED"
.Cd "scsibus* at esiop?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides improved support over
.Xr siop 4
for the Symbios Logic/NCR 53x8xx series of
.Tn SCSI
controller chips:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent
.It
53c825 and 53c825a (Fast-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c875 and 53c875j (Ultra-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c876 (Dual Ultra-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c885 (Ultra-Wide
.Tn SCSI
and
.Tn Ethernet )
.It
53c895 (Ultra2-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c896 (PCI 64bit, dual Ultra2-Wide
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c1010-33 (PCI 64bit, dual Ultra160
.Tn SCSI )
.It
53c1510d (PCI 64bit, dual Ultra2-wide
.Tn SCSI )
.El
Older adapters are supported by the
.Xr siop 4
driver.
.Pp
The SIOP_SYMLED option causes the driver to report SCSI activity on the GPIO
pin 1, which is connected to the activity LED on some adapters. At this time
only the 53c895 based Symbios and Tekram adapters are known to require this.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr siop 4 ,
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4 ,
.Xr uk 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by Manuel Bouyer
.Aq Manuel.Bouyer@lip6.fr
for
.Nx .
