.\" $NetBSD: gcscaudio.4,v 1.1.20.1 2014/08/20 00:02:35 tls Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Thomas Klausner.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 4, 2009
.Dt GCSCAUDIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gcscaudio
.Nd AMD Geode CS5536 audio device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "gcscaudio* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Cd "audio* at audiobus?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports the audio controller of the
.Tn AMD
.Tn Geode
CS5536 Companion Device chip found on some motherboards.
The CS5536 and this driver support 1, 2, 4, and 6 (5.1) channels output,
1 and 2 channels input, and full-duplex.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr pci 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An SHIMIZU Ryo Aq Mt ryo@nerv.org
.Sh BUGS
This driver was only tested on the KOHJINSHA SA5SX04, and
5.1 channel output is not tested.
