.\" $NetBSD: gpiosim.4,v 1.6.16.1 2023/11/26 12:13:19 bouyer Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009, 2013 Marc Balmer <marc@msys.ch>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd November 8, 2013
.Dt GPIOSIM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gpiosim
.Nd General Purpose Input/Output Simulator
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pseudo-device gpiosim"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
pseudo-device simulates a 64-bit wide
.Xr gpio 4
device.
The state of the simulated device can be manipulated through the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface.
For this purpose, access the "hw.gpiosim<N>.value"
.Xr sysctl 8
variable, where "<N>" denotes the number of the
.Nm
instance.
.Pp
Both edge and level interrupts are simulated.  The "hw.gpiosim<N>.ms"
.Xr sysctl 8
variable will change the amount of time between
.Xr callout 9
ticks for simulated level interrupts.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gpio 4 ,
.Xr gpioirq 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Marc Balmer Aq Mt marc@msys.ch
Simulated interrupts added by
.An Brad Spencer Aq Mt brad@anduin.eldar.org .
