.\"	$NetBSD: hdaudio.4,v 1.4.2.3 2010/10/15 23:34:03 snj Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009, 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Precedence Technologies Ltd
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd September 28, 2010
.Dt HDAUDIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hdaudio
.Nd High Definition Audio device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "hdaudio* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Cd "hdafg* at hdaudiobus?"
.Cd "audio* at audiobus?"
.Pp
.Cd "options HDAUDIO_DEBUG"
.Cd "options HDAUDIO_AFG_DEBUG"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver is expected to support any PCI device which is
compliant to the High Definition Audio Specification 1.0.
It is a replacement for
.Xr azalia 4 .
It was written from scratch following the Intel HD Audio and Microsoft
Universal Audio Architecture specifications.
.Pp
The driver consists of two interlinked components, which reflects the
hardware design.
The
.Nm
component interfaces with a PCI/PCIe bus and provides an
.Xr hdaudiobus 4
onto which different function groups attach.
Each function group (e.g. audio, vendor-specific modem) is exported as a
separate child device of the
.Nm
controller.
Audio function groups (a.k.a. audio codec) are exported as
.Xr hdafg 4
devices.
.Pp
Audio codecs are available from a number of manufacturers and are made up of a
number of widgets (e.g. audio mixer, output pin, analog-to-digital converter).
The way the widgets are interlinked varies significantly between
implementations.
The tree of widgets must be parsed and mapped to
.Xr mixer 4
controls.
As part of this process, loops in the inter-codec links must be detected
and muted, bi-directional pins must be set up appropriately and the locations
of pins determined.
Unlike the
.Xr azalia 4
driver (which tends to generate a large number of unclearly named
.Xr mixer 4
controls),
.Nm
works backwards by starting with a list of desired, consistent and compatible
.Xr mixer 4
controls and configuring/discovering appropriate widget link routes to fit.
.Pp
By following the published mechanisms for common implementations of widget
parsing, it is expected that nearly all High Definition Audio devices will
be supported without requiring per-device quirks.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr mixer 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr hdaudioctl 8 ,
.Pa http://www.intel.com/standards/hdaudio/
.Pa http://www.microsoft.com/whdc/device/audio/
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Nx 5.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jared McNeill Aq jmcneill@NetBSD.org
under contract by
.An Precedence Technologies Ltd Aq http://www.precedence.co.uk/ .
The UAA-compliant widget parser is derived from the
.Fx
snd_hda(4) driver.
.Sh BUGS
The following items are not yet implemented:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Improve power management support when driver is idle
.It
Add support for non-PCM output formats
.It
Handle unsolicited RIRB messages
.It
Modem function groups
.El
