.\"	$NetBSD: ibmcd.4,v 1.2.2.2 2013/01/23 00:05:34 yamt Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 Marc Balmer <marc@msys.ch>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 17, 2012
.Dt IBMCD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ibmcd
.Nd support for the IBM 4810 BSP cash drawer port
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ibmcd* at at pci ? dev ? function ?"
.Cd "gpio* at ibmcd?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver controls the cash drawer port of the IBM 4810 BSP PCI device found
in IBM point of sale terminals (e.g. in the SurePOS 300 series) using the GPIO
subsystem.
.Pp
.Nm
provides a GPIO device with three pins: pin 0 is used to control the cash drawer
while pin 1 can be used to read the current state of the sense input pin.
A logical 0 means the cash drawer is closed, a logical 1 means the cash drawer
is open.
.Pp
Pin 2 reports if a cash drawer is connected.
A logical 0 means there is no cash drawer connected, a logical 1 means the cash drawer is connected.
.Pp
To open the cash drawer, set pin 0 to logical 1.
There is no need to reset pin 0 to logical 0 afterwards as the device generates
a oneshot impulse.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gpio 4 ,
.Xr ptcd 4 ,
.Xr gpioctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 6.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Marc Balmer Aq marc@msys.ch .
