.\"	$NetBSD: ioat.4,v 1.5.42.1 2009/05/13 19:19:08 jym Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer
.\" Science Department.
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: NetBSD: boca.4,v 1.3 1999/03/16 01:19:15 garbled Exp
.\"     from: @(#)dca.4	5.2 (Berkeley) 3/27/91
.\"	from: Id: com.4,v 1.1 1993/08/06 11:19:07 cgd Exp
.\"
.Dd January 24, 2000
.Dt IOAT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ioat
.Nd
multiplexing serial communications interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
For 6-port BOCA IOAT66 board:
.Pp
.Cd "ioat0   at isa? port 0x220 irq 5"
.Cd "com2    at ioat? slave ?"
.Cd "com3    at ioat? slave ?"
.Cd "com4    at ioat? slave ?"
.Cd "com5    at ioat? slave ?"
.Cd "com6    at ioat? slave ?"
.Cd "com7    at ioat? slave ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm ioat
driver provides support for BOCA Research IOAT66
boards that multiplex together up to six
.Tn EIA
.Tn RS-232C
.Pf ( Tn CCITT
.Tn V.28 )
communications interfaces.
.Pp
Each
.Nm
device is the master device for up to six
.Nm com
devices.  The kernel configuration specifies these
.Nm com
devices as slave devices of the
.Nm
device, as shown in the synopsis.  The slave ID given for each
.Nm com
device determines which bit in the interrupt multiplexing register is
tested to find interrupts for that device.
The
.Tn port
specification for the
.Nm
device is used to compute the base addresses for the
.Nm com
subdevices. The port for the interrupt multiplexing register is not
programmable.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /dev/tty??
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr com 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was adapted from the boca driver by Michael Richardson.
