.\" $NetBSD: ipip.4,v 1.1.6.1 1999/12/27 18:30:43 wrstuden Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright 1998 (c) The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Heiko W.Rupp <hwr@pilhuhn.de>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"     This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"	Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its 
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived 
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS 
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED 
.\" TO, THE  IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT  LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY  OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd 28 March 1999
.Dt IPIP 4
.Os 
.Sh NAME
.Nm ipip
.Nd encapsulating network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd pseudo-device ipip Op Ar count
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm ipip
network interface is a pseudo device that allows to encapsulate datagrams
into IP. These encapsulated datagrams are routed to a destination host,
where they are decapsulated and further routed to their final destination.
The so called ``tunnel'' appears to the inner datagrams like one hop.
Encapsulation is according to RFC 2003. The outer datagram header is of
IP type 4 (IPIP).
.Pp
The network interfaces are named
.Sy ipip Ns Ar 0 ,
.Sy ipip Ns Ar 1 
and so on, as many as have given on the 
.Sy pseudo-device
line in the system config file.
.Pp
Note that the IP addresses of the tunnel endpoints may be the same as the
ones defined with 
.Xr ifconfig
for the interface (as if IP is encapsulated), but need not be.
.Pp
.Sh EXAMPLE
Configuration example:


Host X-- Host A  ----------------tunnel---------- cisco D------Host E
          \\                                          |
           \\                                        /
             +------Host B----------Host C----------+

   On host A (NetBSD):

   # route add default B
   # ifconfig ipipN  A D netmask 0xffffffff  up
   # route add E D

   On Host D (Cisco):

   Interface TunnelX 	
    ip unnumbered D   ! e.g. address from Ethernet interface
    tunnel source D   ! e.g. address from Ethernet interface
    tunnel destination A
   ip route C <some interface and mask>
   ip route A mask C
   ip route X mask tunnelX

   OR

   On Host D (NetBSD):

   # route add default C
   # ifconfig ipipN D A 
.Pp
If all goes well, you should see packets flowing ;-)
.Pp
If you want to reach Host A over the tunnel (from the Cisco D), then 
you have to have an alias on Host A for e.g. the Ethernet interface like:
     ifconfig <etherif> alias Y
 and on the cisco
     ip route Y mask tunnelX
.Sh NOTE
For correct operation, the
.Nm
device needs a route to the destination, that is less specific than the
one over the tunnel.
(Basically, there needs to be a route to the decapsulating host that
does not run over the tunnel, as this would be a loop ..)
.Pp
In order to 
.Xr ifconfig
to actually mark the interface as up, the keyword ``up'' must be given
last on its command line.
.Pp
The kernel must be set to forward datagrams by either option
``GATEWAY'' in the kernel config file or by issuing the appropriate 
option to
.Xr sysctl .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr gre 4 ,
.Xr atalk 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr options 4 ,
.Xr protocols 5 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Pp
A description of IPIP encapsulation can be found in RFC 2003.
.Sh BUGS
The ipip_compute_route() code in ip_ipip.c toggles the last bit of the
IP-address to provoke the search for a less specific route than the
one directly over the tunnel to prevent loops. This is possibly not
the best solution.
.Pp
Traceroute does not work yet over the tunnel :(
