.\"     $OpenBSD: it.4,v 1.7 2006/03/29 14:10:51 jsg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Juan Romero Pardines <juan@xtrarom.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Julien Bordet <zejames@greygats.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd May 13, 2006
.Dt IT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm it
.Nd ITE IT8705F, IT8712F and SiS SiS950 hardware monitors
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "it0 at isa? port 0x290"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn IT8705F , IT8712F
and
.Tn SiS950
hardware monitors to be used with the
.Xr envsys 4
interface.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver has 15 sensors:
.Bl -column "Sensor" "Units" "Typical" -offset indent
.It Sy "Sensor" Ta Sy "Units" Ta Sy "Typical Use"
.It Li "Fan0" Ta "RPM" Ta "CPU Fan"
.It Li "Fan1" Ta "RPM" Ta "System Fan"
.It Li "Fan2" Ta "RPM" Ta "External Fan"
.It Li "VIN0" Ta "uV DC" Ta "Core voltage"
.It Li "VIN1" Ta "uV DC" Ta "Core voltage"
.It Li "VIN2" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+3.3V"
.It Li "VIN3" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+5V"
.It Li "VIN4" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+12V"
.It Li "VIN5" Ta "uV DC" Ta "Unknown"
.It Li "VIN6" Ta "uV DC" Ta "-12V"
.It Li "VIN7" Ta "uV DC" Ta "-5V"
.It Li "VBAT" Ta "uV DC" Ta "VBAT"
.It Li "Temp" Ta "uK" Ta "CPU Temperature"
.It Li "Temp" Ta "uK" Ta "Motherboard Temperature"
.It Li "Temp" Ta "uK" Ta "Unknown"
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr envsys 4 ,
.Xr envstat 8
.Sh NOTES
By default the
.Nm
driver uses the port address
.Tn 0x290
but another manufacturers are known to use
.Tn 0xc00 or 0xd00
port addresses.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.4 
and then it was ported to
.Nx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Julien Bordet Aq zejames@greyhats.org
and was ported to
.Nx 
by
.An Juan Romero Pardines Aq juan@xtrarom.org .
.Sh BUGS
Interrupt support is unimplemented.
