.\" $NetBSD: iwm.4,v 1.6 2021/11/10 07:58:44 nia Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Thomas Klausner.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 10, 2021
.Dt IWM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm iwm
.Nd Intel Wireless AC and Centrino Wireless IEEE 802.11 wireless network driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "iwm* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for
Intel Wireless 3160, 3165, 3168, 4165, 7260, 7265, 8260, and 8265
PCIe Mini Card Dual Band network adapters.
.Pp
By default, the
.Nm
driver configures the adapter for BSS operation (aka infrastructure mode).
This mode requires the use of an access point.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr iwn 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig.if 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Antti Kantee Aq Mt pooka@NetBSD.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver only supports the 802.11a/b/g capabilities offered by the
adapters.
Additional work is required in
.Xr ieee80211 9
before 802.11n/802.11ac modes can be supported.
