.\"	$NetBSD: ixv.4,v 1.3.2.4 2021/03/11 16:04:25 martin Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Masanobu SAITOH.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 9, 2021
.Dt IXV 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ixv
.Nd Intel 10 Gigabit Ethernet virtual function
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ixv* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports Intel 10 Gigabit Ethernet virtual function that 82599 and
newer chips support.
It can be used on a
.Nx
guest that the host supports SR-IOV.
.Sh OPTIONS
The
.Nm
driver doesn't use the common
.Xr MCLGET 9
interface and use the driver specific cluster allocation mechanism.
If it's exhausted, the
.Xr evcnt 9
counter "ixgX qY Rx no jumbo mbuf" is incremented.
If this is observed,
the number can be changed by the following config parameter:
.Bl -tag -width IXGBE_JCLNUM_MULTI -offset 3n
.It Dv IXGBE_JCLNUM_MULTI
The number of RX jumbo buffers (clusters) per queue is calculated by
.Dv IXGBE_JCLNUM_MULTI
* (number of rx descriptors).
The total number of clusters per queue is available with the
.Li hw.ixgN.num_jcl_per_queue
.Xr sysctl 7 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ixg 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver comes from
.Fx .
It first appeared in
.Nx 8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Intel Corporation Aq Mt freebsdnic@mailbox.intel.com .
.Sh BUGS
The following event counters are not cleared by
.Dv SIOCZIFDATA
because the corresponding registers are read only and not cleared on read:
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
Good Packets Received
.It
Good Octets Received
.It
Multicast Packets Received
.It
Good Packets Transmitted
.It
Good Octets Transmitted
.El
.Sh BUGS
VLAN over
.Nm
won't work because VLAN hardware filter function is not currently implemented
correctly.
