.\"	$NetBSD: jmide.4,v 1.3 2007/12/08 11:09:58 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Manuel Bouyer.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by Manuel Bouyer.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd July 2, 2007
.Dt JMIDE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm jmide
.Nd JMicron Technology JMB36x PCIe to SATA II/PATA controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "jmide* at pci? dev ? function ? flags 0x0000"
.Cd "ahcisata* at jmide?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the JMicron Technology JMB36x IDE controllers.
.Pp
These PCI-e controllers exist in different flavors (1 or 2 PATA Ultra/133
ports and/or 1 or 2 SATA-II ports), and are highly flexible.
The SATA ports can be attached to the integrated AHCI controller or
attached to the PCI IDE channels in PATA emulation, in either single-drive
emulation on each PCI IDE channels, or in master/slave emulation on one of the
PCI IDE channels.
.Pp
When enabled, the AHCI controller can either be on the PCI function 0 or
function 2.
The PCI IDE controller can also be on either PCI function, and
can share the PCI function with AHCI.
The
.Nm
driver supports both the AHCI controller and PCI IDE controller in various
configurations.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ahcisata 4 ,
.Xr ata 4 ,
.Xr atapi 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr pciide 4 ,
.Xr wd 4 ,
.Xr wdc 4
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Manuel Bouyer .
