.\"	$NetBSD: kloader.4,v 1.3.14.1 2014/08/20 00:02:35 tls Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Valeriy E. Ushakov
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 3, 2004
.Dt KLOADER 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm kloader
.Nd in-kernel bootloader
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd options KLOADER
.Cd options KLOADER_KERNEL_PATH="\e"/netbsd\e""
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
is the in-kernel bootloader for platforms that do not have a proper
firmware.
.Pp
Some platforms supported by
.Nx
do not have a firmware that can boot the
.Nx
kernel.
Examples are game consoles (dreamcast and playstation2 ports), and
handhelds (hpcarm, hpcmips, and hpcsh ports).
On such platforms the bootloader is usually a host program that runs
under the native OS.
This means that rebooting
.Nx
is a lengthy process of booting into the native OS first,
launching the bootloader program, and finally booting
.Nx
again.
This problem is addressed by
.Nm ,
which allows the currently running kernel to serve as a bootloader
for the kernel being booted, thus avoiding the burden of booting
into the native OS first.
.Pp
When
.Nm
is configured into the kernel, a call to
.Xr reboot 2
causes the
.Nm
to load the new kernel into memory, and arrange for control to be
passed to the new kernel \(em just like a standalone bootloader does.
The new kernel then boots in the ordinary manner.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr reboot 2 ,
.Xr boot 8 ,
.Xr reboot 8
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
first appeared in
.Nx 1.6 .
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
ignores
.Fa howto
and
.Fa bootstr
arguments passed to the
.Xr reboot 2
system call, and reboots the system with the previous boot settings.
.Pp
.Nm
doesn't support booting compressed kernels.
.Pp
The hpcarm port doesn't support
.Nm
yet.
