.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2002-2006 David Boggs. (boggs@boggs.palo-alto.ca.us)
.\" All rights reserved.  I wrote this man page from scratch.
.\"
.\" BSD License:
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" GNU General Public License:
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for
.\" more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
.\" this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59
.\" Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.\"                   * * * * * * * * * * * * *
.\"                   * ATTENTION MDOC POLICE *
.\"   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
.\"   * This device driver works on FIVE OSs with NO changes. *
.\"   * IFDEFS are used to ignore C and Groff code that is    *
.\"   *  not relevant to a particular Operating System.       *
.\"   * Author will merge local changes and re-sync copies.   *
.\"   * Please feel free to correct my groff usage, but...    *
.\"   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
.\"           *  PLEASE DO NOT "UN-IFDEF" THIS FILE!  *
.\"           * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
.\"
.\" $NetBSD: lmc.4,v 1.19.2.2 2014/08/20 00:02:35 tls Exp $
.\"
.Dd April 11, 2006
.Dt LMC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lmc
.Nd device driver for
.Tn LMC
(and some
.Tn SBE )
wide-area network interface cards
.Sh SYNOPSIS
This driver is built into the GENERIC kernel so it should "just work".
.Pp
The driver can be built into a kernel by adding the following to
.Pa /sys/arch/ARCH/conf/YOURKERNEL :
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Cd lmc*		at pci?
.Cd options	ALTQ
.Cd options	ALTQ_HFSC  # for altq example
.Cd pseudo-device sppp
.Cd pseudo-device bpfilter
.Ed
.Pp
The driver can send and receive raw IP packets even if
SPPP is not configured into the kernel.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This is an open-source
.Tn Unix
device driver for PCI-bus wide-area network interface cards.
It sends and receives packets
in HDLC frames over synchronous circuits.
A computer plus
.Ux
plus some
.Tn LMC
cards makes an
.Em open
wide-area network router.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver works with
.Fx ,
.Nx ,
.Ox ,
.Tn BSD/OS ,
and
.Tn Linux
OSs.
It has been tested on
.Tn i386
(SMP 32-bit little-end),
.Tn PowerPC
(32-bit big-end),
.Tn Alpha
(64-bit little-end), and
.Tn Sparc
(64-bit big-end) architectures.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver works with the following cards:
.Bl -tag -width "LMC5200" -offset indent
.It Sy LMC5200
HSSI\[em]High Speed Serial Interface,
.Bd -unfilled -compact
EIA612/613, 50-pin connector,
0 to 52 Mb/s, DTE only.
.Ed
.It Sy LMC5245
T3, 2xBNC conns, 75 ohm
.Bd -unfilled -compact
C-Parity or M13 Framing,
DSX-3 up to 910 ft.
.Ed
.It Sy LMC1000
SSI\[em]Synchronous Serial Interface,
.Bd -unfilled -compact
V.35, X.21, EIA449, EIA530(A), EIA232,
0 to 10 Mb/s, DTE or DCE.
.Ed
.It Sy LMC1200
T1/E1, RJ45 conn, 100 or 120 ohms,
.Bd -unfilled -compact
T1-B8ZS-ESF, T1-AMI-SF, E1-HDB3-many,
DSX-1 up to 1500 ft; CSU up to 6 Kft.
.Ed
.El
.Pp
.Tn LMC
cards contain a high-performance
.Sy PCI
interface, an
.Sy HDLC
function and
either integrated
.Sy modems
(T1, T3) or
.Sy modem
interfaces (HSSI and SSI).
.Bl -tag -width "Modem" -offset indent
.It Sy PCI
The PCI interface is a
.Tn "DEC 21140A Tulip"
Fast Ethernet chip.
This chip has an efficient PCI implementation with scatter/gather DMA,
and can run at 100 Mb/s full duplex (twice as fast as needed here).
.It Sy HDLC
The HDLC functions (ISO-3309: flags, bit-stuffing, CRC) are implemented
in a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) which talks to the Ethernet
chip through a Media Independent Interface (MII).
The hardware in the FPGA translates between Ethernet packets and
HDLC frames on-the-fly; think of it as a WAN PHY chip for Ethernet.
.It Sy Modem
The modem chips are the main differences between cards.
HSSI cards use ECL10K chips to implement the EIA-612/613 interface.
T3 cards use a
.Tn TranSwitch TXC-03401
framer chip.
SSI cards use
.Tn Linear Technology LTC1343
modem interface chips.
T1 cards use a
.Tn BrookTree/Conexant/Mindspeed Bt8370
framer and line interface chip.
.El
.Pp
Line protocol stacks exist above device drivers
and below internet protocol stacks.
They typically encapsulate packets in HDLC frames and deal with
higher-level issues like protocol multiplexing and security.
The driver is compatible with several line protocol stacks:
.Bl -tag -width "GenericHDLC" -offset indent
.It Sy SPPP
.Xr sppp 4
implements Synchronous-PPP and Cisco-HDLC in the kernel.
.It Sy RawIP
The null line protocol, built into the driver, sends and receives
raw IPv4 and IPv6 packets in HDLC frames with no extra bytes of
overhead and no state at the end points.
.El
.\"
.Sh EXAMPLES
.\"
.Ss ifconfig and lmcconfig
.\"
The program
.Xr lmcconfig 8
manipulates interface parameters beyond the scope of
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Ic lmcconfig
has many flags and options,
but in normal operation only a few are needed.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0
.Ed
displays interface configuration and status.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -X 1
.Ed
selects the built-in RawIP line protocol stack.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -X 2 -x 2
.Ed
selects the SPPP stack and the PPP protocol.
.Pp
Some configuration options are available through
.Ic ifconfig
as well as
.Ic lmcconfig .
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic ifconfig -m lmc0
.Ed
lists the available media options.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Ic ifconfig lmc0 mediaopt loopback
.Ed
loops the interface transmitter to the receiver for testing.
This loopback uses a path present in every card type.
.Ic lmcconfig
can select card-specific loopbacks, such as outbound payload loopback.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Ic ifconfig lmc0 debug
.Ed
enables debugging output from the device driver and from
the line protocol stack above it.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -D
.Ed
enables debugging output from the device driver.
.Pp
Debugging messages that appear on the console are also
written to file
.Pa /var/log/messages .
.Em Caution :
when
things go very wrong, a torrent of debugging messages
can swamp the console and bring a machine to its knees.
.\"
.Ss Operation
Configure a PPP link using SPPP with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -X 2 -x 2
.Ic ifconfig lmc0 10.0.0.1 10.0.0.2
.Ed
.Pp
Configure a Cisco-HDLC link using SPPP with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -X 2 -x 3
.Ic ifconfig lmc0 10.0.0.1 10.0.0.2
.Ed
.Pp
Configure a RAWIP link with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -X 1
.Ic ifconfig lmc0 10.0.0.1 10.0.0.2
.Ed
.Sh TESTING
.Ss Testing with Loopbacks
Testing with loopbacks requires only one card and
can test everything on that card.
Packets can be looped back at many points: in the PCI chip,
in the modem chips, through a loopback plug, in the
local external equipment, or at the far end of a circuit.
.Pp
All cards can be looped through the PCI chip.
Cards with internal modems can be looped through
the modem framer and the modem line interface.
Cards for external modems can be looped through
the driver/receiver chips.
See
.Xr lmcconfig 8
for details.
.Pp
Configure the card with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic ifconfig lmc0 10.0.0.1 10.0.0.1
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width "T1/E1" -offset indent
.It Sy HSSI
Loopback plugs can be ordered from SBE (and others).
Transmit clock is normally supplied by the external modem.
When an HSSI card is operated with a loopback plug, the PCI bus
clock must be used as the transmit clock, typically 33 MHz.
When testing an HSSI card with a loopback plug,
configure it with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -a 2
.Ed
.Dq Fl a Li 2
selects the PCI bus clock as the transmit clock.
.It Sy T3
Connect the two BNC jacks with a short coax cable.
.It Sy SSI
Loopback plugs can be ordered from SBE (only).
Transmit clock is normally supplied by the external modem.
When an SSI card is operated with a loopback plug,
the on-board clock synthesizer must be used.
When testing an SSI card with a loopback plug,
configure it with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -E -f 10000000
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -compact
.Dq Fl E
puts the card in DCE mode to source a transmit clock.
.Dq Fl f Li 10000000
sets the internal clock source to 10 Mb/s.
.Ed
.It Sy T1/E1
A loopback plug is a modular plug with two wires
connecting pin 1 to pin 4 and pin 2 to pin 5.
.El
.Pp
One can also test by connecting to a local modem (HSSI and SSI)
or NI (T1 and T3) configured to loop back.
Cards can generate signals to loopback remote equipment
so that complete circuits can be tested; see
.Xr lmcconfig 8
for details.
.Ss Testing with a Modem
Testing with a modem requires two cards of different types.
The cards can be in the same machine or different machines.
.Pp
Configure the two cards with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic ifconfig lmc0 10.0.0.1 10.0.0.2
.Ic ifconfig lmc1 10.0.0.2 10.0.0.1
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width "T3/HSSI" -offset indent
.It Sy T3/HSSI
If you have a T3 modem with an HSSI interface
(made by Digital Link, Larscom, Kentrox etc.\&)
then use an HSSI card and a T3 card.
The coax cables between the card and the modem
must
.Dq "cross over"
(see below).
.It Sy T1/V.35
If you have a T1 (or E1) modem with a V.35, X.21 or EIA530 interface,
then use an SSI card and a T1 card.
Use a T1 null modem cable (see below) between
the external modem and the T1 card.
.El
.\"
.Ss Testing with a Null Modem Cable
.\"
Testing with a null modem cable requires two cards of the same type.
The cards can be in the same machine or different machines.
.Pp
Configure the two cards with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic ifconfig lmc0 10.0.0.1 10.0.0.2
.Ic ifconfig lmc1 10.0.0.2 10.0.0.1
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width "T1/E1" -offset indent
.It Sy HSSI
Three-meter HSSI null-modem cables can be ordered from SBE.
In a pinch, a 50-pin SCSI-II cable up to a few meters will
work as a straight HSSI cable (not a null modem cable).
Longer cables should be purpose-built HSSI cables because
the cable impedance is different.
Transmit clock is normally supplied by the external modem.
When an HSSI card is connected by a null modem cable, the PCI bus
clock can be used as the transmit clock, typically 33 MHz.
When testing an HSSI card with a null modem cable,
configure it with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -a 2
.Ed
.Dq Fl a Li 2
selects the PCI bus clock as the transmit clock.
.It Sy T3
T3 null modem cables are just 75-ohm coax cables with BNC connectors.
TX OUT on one card should be connected to RX IN on the other card.
In a pinch, 50-ohm thin Ethernet cables
.Em usually
work up to a few meters, but they will
.Em not
work for longer runs\[em]75-ohm coax is
.Em required .
.It Sy SSI
Three-meter SSI null modem cables can be ordered from SBE.
An SSI null modem cable reports a cable type of V.36/EIA449.
Transmit clock is normally supplied by the external modem.
When an SSI card is connected by a null modem cable,
an on-board clock synthesizer is used.
When testing an SSI card with a null modem cable,
configure it with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic lmcconfig lmc0 -E -f 10000000
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -compact
.Dq Fl E
puts the card in DCE mode to source a transmit clock.
.Dq Fl f Li 10000000
sets the internal clock source to 10 Mb/s.
.Ed
.It Sy T1/E1
A T1 null modem cable has two twisted pairs that connect
pins 1 and 2 on one plug to pins 4 and 5 on the other plug.
Looking into the cable entry hole of a plug,
with the locking tab oriented down,
pin 1 is on the left.
A twisted pair Ethernet cable makes an excellent straight T1 cable.
Alas, Ethernet cross-over cables do not work as T1 null modem cables.
.El
.\"
.Sh OPERATING NOTES
.\"
.Ss LEDs
.\"
HSSI and SSI cards should be operational if all three green LEDs are
on (the upper-left one should be blinking) and the red LED is off.
.Bl -column "YELLOW" "upper-right" -offset indent -compact
.It "RED\0" Ta "upper-right" Ta "No Transmit clock"
.It "GREEN" Ta "upper-left"  Ta "Device driver is alive if blinking"
.It "GREEN" Ta "lower-right" Ta "Modem signals are good"
.It "GREEN" Ta "lower-left"  Ta "Cable is plugged in (SSI only)"
.El
.Pp
T1/E1 and T3 cards should be operational if the upper-left
green LED is blinking and all other LEDs are off.
For the T3 card, if other LEDs are on or blinking,
try swapping the coax cables!
.Bl -column "YELLOW" "upper-right" -offset indent -compact
.It "RED\0"  Ta upper-right Ta "Received signal is wrong"
.It "GREEN"  Ta upper-left  Ta "Device driver is alive if blinking"
.It "BLUE"   Ta lower-right Ta "Alarm Information Signal (AIS)"
.It "YELLOW" Ta lower-left  Ta "Remote Alarm Indication (RAI)"
.El
.Pp
.Bl -column "YELLOW" -offset indent -compact
.It "RED\0"  Ta "blinks if an outward loopback is active."
.It "GREEN"  Ta "blinks if the device driver is alive."
.It "BLUE"   Ta "blinks if sending AIS, on solid if receiving AIS."
.It "YELLOW" Ta "blinks if sending RAI, on solid if receiving RAI."
.El
.\"
.Ss Packet Lengths
.\"
.Bd -unfilled -compact
Maximum transmit and receive packet length is unlimited.
Minimum transmit and receive packet length is one byte.
.Ed
.Pp
Cleaning up after one packet and setting up for the next
packet involves making several DMA references.
This can take longer than the duration of a short packet,
causing the adapter to fall behind.
For typical PCI bus traffic levels and memory system latencies,
back-to-back packets longer than about 20 bytes will always
work (53 byte cells work), but a burst of several hundred
back-to-back packets shorter than 20 bytes will cause packets
to be dropped.
This usually is not a problem since an IPv4 packet header is
at least 20 bytes long.
.Pp
The device driver imposes no constraints on packet size.
Most operating systems set the default Maximum Transmission
Unit (MTU) to 1500 bytes; the legal range is usually (72..65535).
This can be changed with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic ifconfig lmc0 mtu 2000
.Ed
SPPP enforces an MTU of 1500 bytes for PPP and Cisco-HDLC.
RAWIP sets the default MTU to 4032 bytes,
but allows it to be changed to anything.
.Ss ALTQ: Alternate Output Queue Disciplines
The driver has hooks for
.Xr altq 9 ,
the Alternate Queueing package.
To see ALTQ in action, use your favorite traffic generation
program to generate three flows sending down one T3 circuit.
Without ALTQ, the speeds of the three connections will vary chaotically.
Enable ALTQ and two of the connections will run at about 20 Mb/s and
the third will run at about 2 Mb/s.
.Pp
Enable
.Xr altqd 8
and add the following lines to
.Pa /etc/altq.conf :
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic interface lmc0 bandwidth 44M hfsc
.Ic class hfsc lmc0 a root pshare 48
.Ic filter lmc0 a 10.0.0.2 12345 10.0.0.1 0 6
.Ic filter lmc0 a 10.0.0.1 0 10.0.0.2 12345 6
.Ic class hfsc lmc0 b root pshare 48
.Ic filter lmc0 b 10.0.0.2 12346 10.0.0.1 0 6
.Ic filter lmc0 b 10.0.0.1 0 10.0.0.2 12346 6
.Ic class hfsc lmc0 c root pshare 4 default
.Ic filter lmc0 c 10.0.0.2 12347 10.0.0.1 0 6
.Ic filter lmc0 c 10.0.0.1 0 10.0.0.2 12347 6
.Ed
.Pp
The example above requires the
.Xr altq 4
Hierarchical Fair Service Curve
queue discipline to be configured in
.Pa conf/YOURKERNEL :
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic options ALTQ
.Ic options ALTQ_HFSC .
.Ed
.Ss BPF: Berkeley Packet Filter
The driver has hooks for
.Xr bpf 4 ,
the Berkeley Packet Filter, a protocol-independent
raw interface to data link layers.
.Pp
To test the BPF kernel interface,
bring up a link between two machines, then run
.Xr ping 8
and
.Xr tcpdump 8 :
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic ping 10.0.0.1
.Ed
and in a different window:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic tcpdump -i lmc0
.Ed
The output from tcpdump should look like this:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic 03:54:35.979965 10.0.0.2 > 10.0.0.1: icmp: echo request
.Ic 03:54:35.981423 10.0.0.1 > 10.0.0.2: icmp: echo reply
.Ed
Line protocol control packets may appear among the
ping packets occasionally.
.Pp
The kernel must be configured with
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent -compact
.Ic options bpfilter
.Ed
.Ss SNMP: Simple Network Management Protocol
The driver is aware of what is required to be a Network Interface
Object managed by an Agent of the Simple Network Management Protocol.
The driver exports SNMP-formatted configuration and status
information sufficient for an SNMP Agent to create MIBs for:
.Bl -tag -width "RFC-2233" -offset indent -compact
.It RFC-2233
.%T Interfaces group
.It RFC-2496
.%T DS3 interfaces
.It RFC-2495
.%T DS1/E1 interfaces
.It RFC-1659
.%T RS232-like interfaces
.El
.Pp
An SNMP Agent is a user program, not a kernel function.
Agents can retrieve configuration and status information
by using
.Xr ioctl 2
system calls.
User programs should poll
.Va sc->cfg.ticks
which increments once per second after the SNMP state has been updated.
.\"
.Ss E1 Framing
.\"
Phone companies usually insist that customers put a
.Em Frame Alignment Signal
(FAS) in time slot 0.
A Cyclic Redundancy Checksum (CRC) can also ride in time slot 0.
.Em Channel Associated Signalling
(CAS) uses Time Slot 16.
In telco-speak
.Em signalling
is on/off hook, ringing, busy, etc.
Signalling is not needed here and consumes 64 Kb/s.
Only use E1-CAS formats if the other end insists on it!
Use E1-FAS+CRC framing format on a public circuit.
Depending on the equipment installed in a private circuit,
it may be possible to use all 32 time slots for data (E1-NONE).
.\"
.Ss T3 Framing
.\"
M13 is a technique for multiplexing 28 T1s into a T3.
Muxes use the C-bits for speed-matching the tributaries.
Muxing is not needed here and usurps the FEBE and FEAC bits.
Only use T3-M13 format if the other end insists on it!
Use T3-CParity framing format if possible.
Loop Timing, Fractional T3, and HDLC packets in
the Facility Data Link are
.Em not
supported.
.\"
.Ss T1 & T3 Frame Overhead Functions
.\"
.Bd -unfilled -compact
Performance Report Messages (PRMs) are enabled in T1-ESF.
Bit Oriented Protocol (BOP) messages are enabled in T1-ESF.
In-band loopback control (framed or not) is enabled in T1-SF.
Far End Alarm and Control (FEAC) msgs are enabled in T3-CPar.
Far End Block Error (FEBE) reports are enabled in T3-CPar.
Remote Alarm Indication (RAI) is enabled in T3-Any.
Loopbacks initiated remotely time out after 300 seconds.
.Ed
.\"
.Ss T1/E1 'Fractional' 64 kb/s Time Slots
.\"
T1 uses time slots 24..1; E1 uses time slots 31..0.
E1 uses TS0 for FAS overhead and TS16 for CAS overhead.
E1-NONE has
.Em no
overhead, so all 32 TSs are available for data.
Enable/disable time slots by setting 32 1s/0s in a config param.
Enabling an E1 overhead time slot,
or enabling TS0 or TS25-TS31 for T1,
is ignored by the driver, which knows better.
The default TS param, 0xFFFFFFFF, enables the maximum number
of time slots for whatever frame format is selected.
56 Kb/s time slots are
.Em not
supported.
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr bpf 4 ,
.Xr de 4 ,
.Xr sppp 4 ,
.Xr altq.conf 5 ,
.Xr altqd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr init 8 ,
.Xr lmcconfig 8 ,
.Xr modload 8 ,
.Xr ping 8 ,
.Xr tcpdump 8 ,
.Xr altq 9 ,
.Xr ifnet 9
.\"
.Sh HISTORY
.\"
.An Ron Crane
had the idea to use a Fast Ethernet chip as a PCI interface
and add an Ethernet-to-HDLC gate array to make a WAN card.
.An David Boggs
designed the Ethernet-to-HDLC gate array and PC cards.
We did this at our company,
.Tn "LAN Media Corporation (LMC)" .
.Tn "SBE Corporation"
acquired
.Tn LMC
and continues to make the cards.
.Pp
Since the cards use Tulip Ethernet chips, we started with
.An Matt Thomas Ns '
ubiquitous
.Xr de 4
driver.
.An Michael Graff
stripped out the Ethernet stuff and added HSSI stuff.
.An Basil Gunn
ported it to
.Tn Solaris
(lost) and
.An Rob Braun
ported it to
.Tn Linux .
.An Andrew Stanley-Jones
added support for three more cards.
.An David Boggs
rewrote everything and now feels responsible for it.
.\"
.Sh AUTHORS
.\"
.An David Boggs Aq Mt boggs@boggs.palo-alto.ca.us
