.\" $NetBSD: malo.4,v 1.3.2.1 2014/08/20 00:02:35 tls Exp $
.\"	$OpenBSD: malo.4,v 1.35 2010/11/01 17:59:09 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Theo de Raadt.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 30, 2012
.Dt MALO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm malo
.Nd Marvell Libertas IEEE 802.11b/g wireless network device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "malo* at pci?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Marvell Libertas 88W8335/88W8310/88W8385 based
PCI network adapters.
The second generation 88W8335/88W8310 chipsets support 802.11b/g.
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "IBSS-masterXX"
.It BSS mode
Also known as
.Em infrastructure
mode, this is used when associating with an access point, through
which all traffic passes.
This mode is the default.
.\" .It IBSS mode
.\" Also known as
.\" .Em IEEE ad-hoc
.\" mode or
.\" .Em peer-to-peer
.\" mode.
.\" This is the standardized method of operating without an access point.
.\" Stations associate with a service set.
.\" However, actual connections between stations are peer-to-peer.
.\" .It Host AP
.\" In this mode the driver acts as an access point (base station)
.\" for other cards.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured to use
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) or
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA-PSK and WPA2-PSK).
WPA is the de facto encryption standard for wireless networks.
It is strongly recommended that WEP
not be used as the sole mechanism
to secure wireless communication,
due to serious weaknesses in it.
The
.Nm
driver relies on the software 802.11 stack for both encryption and decryption
of data frames.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or on boot with
.Xr ifconfig.if 5 .
.Sh FILES
The driver needs a set of firmware files which are loaded when
an interface is brought up:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /libdata/firmware/malo/malo8335-h
.It Pa /libdata/firmware/malo/malo8335-m
.It Pa /libdata/firmware/malo/malo8338
.It Pa /libdata/firmware/malo/malo8385-h
.It Pa /libdata/firmware/malo/malo8385-m
.El
.Pp
These firmware files are not free because Marvell refuses
to grant distribution rights.
As a result, even though
.Ox
includes the driver, the firmware files cannot be included and
users have to download these files on their own.
.Pp
A prepackaged version of the firmware, designed to be used with
.Xr pkg_add 1 ,
can be found at:
.Bd -literal -offset 3n
http://www.nazgul.ch/malo/malo-firmware-1.4.tgz
.Ed
.Sh HARDWARE
The following cards are among those supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -column -offset 6n -compact "Microcom Travelcard" "MALO111" "CardBus" "a/b/g"
.It Em Card Ta Em Chip Ta Em Bus Ta Em Standard
.It Netgear WG311v3 Ta 88W8335 Ta PCI Ta b/g
.It Tenda TWL542P Ta 88W8335 Ta PCI Ta b/g
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following
.Xr ifconfig.if 5
example configures malo0 to join whatever network is available on boot,
using WEP key
.Dq 0x1deadbeef1 ,
channel 11, obtaining an IP address using DHCP:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dhcp NONE NONE NONE nwkey 0x1deadbeef1 chan 11
.Ed
.Pp
.\"The following
.\".Xr ifconfig.if 5
.\"example creates a host-based access point on boot:
.\".Bd -literal -offset indent
.\"inet 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0 NONE media autoselect \e
.\"	mediaopt hostap nwid my_net chan 11
.\".Ed
.\".Pp
Join an existing BSS network,
.Dq my_net :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# ifconfig malo0 192.168.1.1 netmask 0xffffff00 nwid my_net
.Ed
.Sh NOTES
Contrary to the driver on
.Ox
, this driver currently does not work on PCMCIA/CARDBUS.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig.if 5 ,
.Xr hostapd 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was first written by
.An Claudio Jeker Aq Mt claudio@openbsd.org
and
.An Marcus Glocker Aq Mt mglocker@openbsd.org
and appeared first in
.Ox 4.1 .
.Nx
porting was done by
.An Arnaud Degroote Aq Mt degroote@NetBSD.org .
