.\" $NetBSD: mcommphy.4,v 1.3 2024/10/24 06:48:52 skrll Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Nia Alarie.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 24, 2024
.Dt MCOMMPHY 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mcommphy
.Nd Motorcomm YT8511 / YT8531 family Gigabit Ethernet PHYs
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "mcommphy* at mii?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Motorcomm YT8511C / YT8511H Integrated
10/100/1000 Gigabit Ethernet Transceiver, and the Motorcomm YT8531(D)H /
YT8531(D)C / YT8531P 10/100/1000 Gigabit Ethernet Transceiver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr mii 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Jared D. McNeill ,
and updated by
.An Nick Hudson
with YT8531 support.
It first appeared in
.Nx 10.0 .
