.\" $NetBSD: mcp3kadc.4,v 1.2 2015/08/19 09:57:41 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Frank Wille.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 18, 2015
.Dt MCP3KADC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mcp3kadc
.Nd Microchip 3x0x SAR analog to digital converter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "mcp3kadc* at spi? slave ? flags N"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver reports the current voltage on the chip's ADC channels through the
.Xr envsys 4
API.
The driver calculates these values according to the currently selected
reference voltage
.Li ( Vref ) .
It can be changed through the
.Xr sysctl 8
node
.Li hw.mcp3kadc0.vref .
.Pp
The following table shows the supported chips.
The type of the chip can be selected with the
.Ar flags
argument in the config file.
.Bl -column "Designation" "Resolution" "Input Channels" "flags" -offset indent
.It Sy "Designation" Ta Sy "Resolution" Ta Sy "Input Channels" Ta Sy "flags"
.It Li "MCP3001" Ta "10 bits" Ta "1" Ta "0"
.It Li "MCP3002" Ta "10 bits" Ta "2" Ta "1"
.It Li "MCP3004" Ta "10 bits" Ta "4" Ta "2"
.It Li "MCP3008" Ta "10 bits" Ta "8" Ta "3"
.It Li "MCP3201" Ta "12 bits" Ta "1" Ta "4"
.It Li "MCP3202" Ta "12 bits" Ta "2" Ta "5"
.It Li "MCP3204" Ta "12 bits" Ta "4" Ta "6"
.It Li "MCP3208" Ta "12 bits" Ta "8" Ta "7"
.It Li "MCP3301" Ta "13 bits" Ta "1" Ta "8"
.It Li "MCP3302" Ta "13 bits" Ta "4" Ta "9"
.It Li "MCP3304" Ta "13 bits" Ta "8" Ta "10"
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following
.Xr sysctl 3
variables are provided:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It hw.mcp3kadc0.vref
Defines the reference voltage on the chip's
.Li Vref
pin in millivolts (mV).
It defaults to the ADC's maximum output value + 1
in millivolts (e.g., 4096 for a 12-bit ADC).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr envsys 4 ,
.Xr spi 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Frank Wille .
