.\"	$NetBSD: mfi.4,v 1.10 2010/02/09 06:48:28 wiz Exp $
.\"	$OpenBSD: mfi.4,v 1.7 2006/09/01 09:58:09 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Written by Marco Peereboom <marco@peereboom.us>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY WASABI SYSTEMS, INC. ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL WASABI SYSTEMS, INC
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd February 9, 2010
.Dt MFI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mfi
.Nd LSI Logic \*[Am] Dell MegaRAID SAS RAID controller
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "mfi* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the MegaRAID SAS family of RAID controllers,
including:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -offset indent -compact
.It
Dell PERC 5/e,
PERC 5/i,
PERC 6/e,
PERC 6/i
.It
Intel RAID Controller SRCSAS18E,
SRCSAS144E
.It
LSI Logic MegaRAID SAS 8208ELP,
MegaRAID SAS 8208XLP,
MegaRAID SAS 8300XLP,
MegaRAID SAS 8308ELP,
MegaRAID SAS 8344ELP,
MegaRAID SAS 8408E,
MegaRAID SAS 8480E,
MegaRAID SAS 8708ELP,
MegaRAID SAS 8888ELP,
MegaRAID SAS 8880EM2,
MegaRAID SAS 9260-8i
.El
.Pp
These controllers support RAID 0, RAID 1, RAID 5, RAID 6, RAID 10, RAID 50 and
RAID 60 using either SAS or SATA II drives.
.Pp
Although the controllers are actual RAID controllers,
the driver makes them look just like SCSI controllers.
All RAID configuration is done through the controllers' BIOSes.
.Pp
.Nm
supports monitoring of the logical disks in the controller through the
.Xr bioctl 8
and
.Xr envstat 8
commands.
.Sh EVENTS
The
.Nm
driver is able to send events to
.Xr powerd 8
if a logical drive in the controller is not online.
The
.Em state-changed
event will be sent to the
.Pa /etc/powerd/scripts/sensor_drive
script when such condition happens.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr bioctl 8 ,
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr powerd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 4.0 .
