.\"	$NetBSD: ne.4,v 1.17.2.1 2014/08/20 00:02:35 tls Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Jason R. Thorpe of the Numerical Aerospace Simulation Facility,
.\" NASA Ames Research Center.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 14, 2013
.Dt NE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ne
.Nd NE2000 and compatible Ethernet cards device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ss ISA boards
.Cd "ne0 at isa? port 0x280 irq 9"
.Cd "ne1 at isa? port 0x300 irq 10"
.Cd "ne* at isapnp?"
.Ss MCA boards
.Cd "ne* at mca? slot ?"
.Ss PCI boards
.Cd "ne* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Ss PCMCIA
.Cd "ne* at pcmcia? function ?"
.Ss acorn32
.Cd "ne* at podulebus?"
.Ss amiga
.Cd "ne* at zbus0" # AriadneII
.Cd "ne* at xsurfbus?" # X-Surf
.Cd "ne* at xshbus?" # X-Surf 100
.Ss amigappc
.Cd "ne* at zbus0" # AriadneII
.Cd "ne* at xsurfbus?" # X-Surf
.Cd "ne* at xshbus?" # X-Surf 100
.Ss atari
.Cd "ne0 at mainbus0 # EtherNEC on Atari ROM cartridge slot"
.Ss evbarm
.Cd "ne0 at obio? addr 0x0e000200 intr 5 # on-board Asix AX88796"
.Ss evbsh3
.Cd "ne0 at mainbus? # Realtek RTL8019AS"
.Ss x68k
.Cd "ne* at intio0 addr 0xece300 intr 249 # Nereid Ethernet"
.Cd "ne* at intio0 addr 0xeceb00 intr 248 # Nereid Ethernet"
.Cd "neptune0 at intio0 addr 0xece000 intr 249 # Neptune-X"
.Cd "neptune1 at intio0 addr 0xece400 intr 249 # Neptune-X at alt. addr."
.Cd "ne* at neptune? addr 0x300"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports NE2000 and compatible (including NE1000) Ethernet
cards.
While the original NE2000 is designed for ISA bus, the compatible
Realtek 8019 chip is widely used on various local busses and
.Nm
driver also supports such devices on various machines.
.Sh MEDIA SELECTION
The Realtek 8019 (ISA, ISAPnP, some PCMCIA) and Realtek 8029 (PCI)
NE2000-compatible Ethernet chips include support for software media
selection.
.Pp
Some cards based on AX88x9x chips (like X-Surf 100) also support media
selection and link auto negotiation through the
.Xr mii 4
interface.
.Pp
If one of the above chips is detected by the driver, the list of supported
media will be displayed.
.Pp
For all other chips supported by the
.Nm
driver, media selection must be performed either via card jumper
settings or by vendor-supplied configuration programs.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ne0: where did the card go?"
The driver found the card, but was unable to make the card respond
to complete the configuration sequence.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr isapnp 4 ,
.Xr mca 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr pcmcia 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
