.\"	$NetBSD: ntwoc.4,v 1.5 2003/02/04 22:38:15 perry Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Christian E. Hopps
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 2, 1998
.Dt NTWOC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ntwoc
.Nd Riscom/N2, N2pci, WANic/400 synchronous serial interfaces
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ntwoc* at pci? dev ? function ? flags 0"
.Cd "ntwoc0 at isa? port 0x300 irq 5 iomem 0xc8000 flags 1"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports bit-synchronous serial communication using
Cisco HDLC framing.  The cards are capable of being driven by
the line clock or from an internal baud rate generator.
The devices all use the Hitachi hd64570 serial chip.
The hd64570 supports 2 asynchronous/byte-synchronous/bit-synchronous
serial ports, and has a 4-channel DMA controller for loading
the serial port FIFOs.
.Pp
The isa Riscom/N2 card has a jumper block to set the irq and a DIP switch
to set the port address the card will use.  The values programmed
into the card must be specified with the
.Cm port
and
.Cm irq
locators in the kernel configuration line.
The
.Cm iomem
locator must be specified and must occur on a 16k boundary.
The driver uses a 16k region of io memory.  Bit 0 of the
.Cm flags
locator indicates if there is a second serial port available on the
card.
.Pp
Currently
clock source and speed information is specified with the
.Cm flags
locator in the kernel configuration file.  The flags field has the
following format.
.Bd -literal
  3                   2                   1
1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
+-------------+ +-----+ +-----+ + +---+ +-+     + +---+ +-+   +
      tmc         tdiv    rdiv  e1 rxs1 ts1    e0 rxs0  txs0  np(*)
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width "rxs0 rxs1"
.It Va tmc
Defines the timer constant.  The base clock frequency is divided
by
.Va tmc
to generate the main clock for receiving and sending.  Further
division is possible with the
.Va tdiv
and
.Va rdiv
divisor options.  A value of 0 is treated as 256.
.It Va tdiv
Defines the transmit divisor as
.Pf "2^(" Va tdiv ) .
The internal transmit clock
frequency is determined by dividing the base clock frequency by
.Va tmc
and then dividing by
.Pf "2^(" Va tdiv ) .
.It Va rdiv
Defines the receive divisor as
.Pf "2^(" Va rdiv ) .
The internal receive clock
frequency is determined by dividing the base clock frequency by
.Va tmc
and then dividing by
.Pf "2^(" Va rdiv ) .
.It Va e0 Va e1
If true the internal clock source is used to drive the line clock for port 0
or port 1 respectively.
.It Va rxs0 Va rxs1
Specifies which clock source to use for receiving data on port 0 and
port 1 respectively.  The following values are accepted:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "000" -compact
.It 0
Line clock.
.It 1
Line clock with noise suppression.
.It 2
Internal clock.
.El
.It Va txs0 Va txs1
Specifies which clock source to use for transmitting data on port 0
and port 1 respectively.  The following values are accepted:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "000" -compact
.It 0
Line clock.
.It 1
Internal clock.
.It 2
Receive clock.
.El
.It Va np
(For the isa card only) A value of 1 indicates there is a second serial
port present on the card.  This is auto-detected on the pci card and need
not be specified.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
Cards supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -item -compact
.It
SDL Communications Riscom/N2
.It
SDL Communications N2pci
.It
SDL Communications WAN/ic 400 (untested)
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ntwoc0: TXDMA underrun - fifo depth maxed"
Indicates that the serial port's FIFO is being drained faster
than DMA can fill it.  The driver automatically increases the
low-water mark at which to begin dma transfers when underruns
occur.  This diagnostic is issued when the low-water mark is
maximized (i.e., 1 less than the depth of the FIFO).
.It "ntwoc0: RXDMA buffer overflow"
Indicates that a frame is being received by the card, but
there are no free receive buffers.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The pci driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.4 .
Much of the isa driver was adapted from the
.Fx
.Nm sr
driver and first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
.Sh BUGS
Use of the
.Cm flags
locator for setting the clock sources and speeds should be replaced with
ioctl's and a control program.
