.\"	$NetBSD: pci.4,v 1.123 2022/07/10 08:17:02 nia Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Jason R. Thorpe.  All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Jonathan Stone
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgements:
.\"      This product includes software developed by Jonathan Stone
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 10, 2022
.Dt PCI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pci
.Nd introduction to machine-independent PCI bus support and drivers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pci* at mainbus? bus ?"
.Cd "pci* at pchb? bus ?"
.Cd "pci* at ppb? bus ?"
.Pp
.Cd options PCIVERBOSE
.Cd options PCI_CONFIG_DUMP
.Cd options PCI_ADDR_FIXUP
.Cd options PCI_BUS_FIXUP
.Cd options PCI_INTR_FIXUP
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nx
includes a machine-independent PCI bus subsystem and several
machine-independent PCI device drivers.
.Pp
Your system may support additional PCI devices and attachments.
Drivers for PCI devices not listed here are machine-dependent.
Consult your system's
.Xr intro 4
for additional information.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width PCI_ADDR_FIXUP -offset 3n
.It Dv PCI_ADDR_FIXUP
Fixup PCI I/O and memory addresses.
.Pp
Some i386 and amd64 BIOS implementations don't allocate I/O space and
memory space for some PCI devices \(em primarily BIOS in PnP mode, or laptops
that expect devices to be configured via ACPI.
Since necessary space isn't allocated, those devices
will not work without special handling.
.Pp
This option allocates I/O space and memory space
instead of relying upon the BIOS to do so.
.Pp
If necessary space is already correctly assigned to the devices,
this option leaves the space as is.
.It Dv PCI_BUS_FIXUP
Fixup PCI bus numbering; needed for many
.Xr cardbus 4
bridges.
.Pp
Each PCI bus and CardBus should have a unique bus number.
But some BIOS implementations don't assign a bus number
for subordinate PCI buses.
And many BIOS implementations
don't assign a bus number for CardBuses.
.Pp
A typical symptom of this is the following boot message:
.D1 Sy cardbus0 at cardslot0: bus 0 device 0...
Please note that this cardbus0 has a bus number
.Sq 0 ,
but normally the bus number 0 is used by the machine's
primary PCI bus.
Thus, this bus number for cardbus is incorrect
.Pq not assigned .
In this situation, a device located in cardbus0 doesn't
show correct device ID,
because its bus number 0 incorrectly refers to the primary
PCI bus, and a device ID in the primary PCI bus is shown
in the boot message instead of the device's ID in the cardbus0.
.Pp
This option assigns bus numbers for all subordinate
PCI buses and CardBuses.
.Pp
Since this option renumbers all PCI buses and CardBuses,
all bus numbers of subordinate buses become different
when this option is enabled.
.It Dv PCI_INTR_FIXUP
Fixup PCI interrupt routing via PCIBIOS or ACPI.
.Pp
Some i386 and amd64 BIOS implementations don't assign an interrupt for
some devices.
.Pp
This option assigns an interrupt for such devices instead
of relying upon the BIOS to do so.
.Pp
If a valid interrupt has already been assigned to a device, this
option leaves the interrupt as is.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
.Nx
includes machine-independent PCI drivers, sorted by device type and driver name:
.Ss SCSI interfaces
.Bl -tag -width pcdisplay(4) -offset indent
.It Xr ahc 4
Adaptec 29xx, 39xx, and other AIC-7xxx-based SCSI
interfaces.
.It Xr adv 4
Advansys SCSI interfaces.
.It Xr adw 4
Advansys Ultra Wide SCSI interfaces.
.It Xr bha 4
Buslogic BT-9xx SCSI interfaces.
.It Xr dpt 4
DPT SmartCache/SmartRAID III and IV SCSI interfaces.
.It Xr iha 4
Initio INIC-940/950 SCSI interfaces.
.It Xr isp 4
QLogic ISP-1020, ISP-1040, and ISP-2100 SCSI and FibreChannel interfaces.
.It Xr mfi 4
LSI Logic & Dell MegaRAID SAS RAID controllers.
.It Xr mly 4
Mylex AcceleRAID and eXtremeRAID controllers with v6 firmware.
.It Xr mpii 4
LSI Logic Fusion-MPT Message Passing Interface II SAS controllers.
.It Xr mpt 4
LSI Logic Fusion-MPT SCSI/Fibre Channel/SAS controllers.
.It Xr nca 4
Domex 536 SCSI interfaces.
.It Xr pcscp 4
Advanced Micro Devices Am53c974 PCscsi-PCI SCSI interfaces.
.It Xr siop 4
Symbios Logic/NCR 53c8xx-family SCSI interfaces.
.It Xr trm 4
Tekram TRM-S1040 ASIC based SCSI interfaces.
.El
.Ss Storage controllers
.Bl -tag -width pcdisplay(4) -offset indent
.It Xr aac 4
The Adaptec AAC family of RAID controllers.
.It Xr ahcisata 4
AHCI 1.0 and 1.1 compliant SATA controllers.
.It Xr amr 4
The AMI and LSI Logic MegaRAID family of RAID controllers.
.It Xr arcmsr 4
Areca Technology Corporation SATA/SAS RAID controllers.
.It Xr cac 4
Compaq array controllers.
.It Xr ciss 4
HP/Compaq Smart ARRAY 5/6 RAID controllers.
.It Xr icp 4
ICP Vortex GDT and Intel Storage RAID controllers.
.It Xr ixpide 4
ATI Technologies IXP IDE controllers
.It Xr mlx 4
Mylex DAC960 and DEC SWXCR RAID controllers.
.It Xr nside 4
National Semiconductor PC87415 PCI-IDE controllers.
.It Xr nvme 4
Non-Volatile Memory (NVM Express) host controllers.
.It Xr pdcsata 4
Promise Serial-ATA disk controllers.
.It Xr pciide 4
IDE disk controllers.
.It Xr rtsx 4
Realtek SD card readers.
.It Xr svwsata 4
Serverworks Serial ATA disk controllers.
.It Xr twa 4
3ware Apache RAID controllers.
.It Xr twe 4
3Ware Escalade RAID controllers.
.It Xr viaide 4
AMD, NVIDIA and VIA IDE disk controllers.
.El
.Ss Wired network interfaces
.Bl -tag -width pcdisplay(4) -offset indent
.It Xr alc 4
Atheros AR813x/AR815x/AR816x/AR817x and Killer E2200/2400/2500
10/100/1000 Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr ale 4
Atheros AR8121/AR8113/AR8114 (Attansic L1E) 10/100/1000 Ethernet
interfaces.
.It Xr aq 4
Aquantia AQC multigigabit Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr bge 4
Broadcom BCM57xx/BCM590x 10/100/1000 Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr bnx 4
Broadcom NetXtreme II 10/100/1000 Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr ena 4
Elastic Network Adapter interfaces.
.It Xr ep 4
3Com 3c590, 3c595, 3c900, and 3c905 Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr epic 4
SMC83C170 (EPIC/100) Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr et 4
Agere/LSI ET1310/ET1301 10/100/1000 Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr ex 4
3Com 3c900, 3c905, and 3c980 Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr fxp 4
Intel EtherExpress PRO 10+/100B Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr gsip 4
National Semiconductor DP83820 based Gigabit Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr hme 4
Sun Microelectronics STP2002-STQ Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr ixg 4
Intel 82598EB, 82599, X540 and X550 10 Gigabit Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr ixl 4
Intel 700 series Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr jme 4
JMicron Technologies JMC250/JMC260 Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr le 4
PCNet-PCI Ethernet interfaces.
Note, the
.Xr pcn 4
driver supersedes this driver.
.It Xr lii 4
Attansic/Atheros L2 Fast-Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr mcx 4
Mellanox 5th generation Ethernet devices.
.It Xr msk 4
Marvell Yukon 2 based Gigabit Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr ne 4
NE2000-compatible Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr nfe 4
NVIDIA nForce Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr ntwoc 4
SDL Communications N2pci and WAN/ic 400 synchronous serial interfaces.
.It Xr pcn 4
AMD PCnet-PCI family of Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr re 4
Realtek 10/100/1000 Ethernet adapters.
.It Xr rge 4
Realtek RTL8125-based Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr rtk 4
Realtek 8129/8139 based Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr sf 4
Adaptec AIC-6915 10/100 Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr sip 4
Silicon Integrated Systems SiS 900, SiS 7016, and National Semiconductor
DP83815 based Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr sk 4
SysKonnect SK-98xx based Gigabit Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr ste 4
Sundance ST-201 10/100 based Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr stge 4
Sundance/Tamarack TC9021 based Gigabit Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr ti 4
Alteon Networks Tigon I and Tigon II Gigabit Ethernet driver.
.It Xr tl 4
Texas Instruments ThunderLAN-based Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr tlp 4
DECchip 21x4x and clone Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr vge 4
VIA Networking Technologies VT6122 PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapter driver.
.It Xr vmx 4
VMware VMXNET3 virtual Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr vr 4
VIA VT3043 (Rhine) and VT86C100A (Rhine-II) Ethernet interfaces.
.It Xr wm 4
Intel i8254x Gigabit Ethernet driver.
.El
.Ss Wireless network interfaces
.Bl -tag -width pcdisplay(4) -offset indent
.It Xr an 4
Aironet 4500/4800 and Cisco 340 series 802.11 interfaces.
.It Xr atw 4
ADMtek ADM8211 IEEE 802.11b PCI/CardBus wireless network interaces.
.It Xr ath 4
Atheros IEEE 802.11a/b/g wireless network interfaces.
.It Xr athn 4
Atheros IEEE 802.11a/b/g/n wireless network interfaces.
.It Xr bwi 4
Broadcom BCM430x/4318 IEEE 802.11b/g wireless network interfaces.
.It Xr bwfm 4
Broadcom and Cypress FullMAC wireless network interfaces.
.It Xr ipw 4
Intel PRO/Wireless 2100 MiniPCI network interfaces.
.It Xr iwi 4
Intel PRO/Wireless 2200BG and 2915ABG MiniPCI network interfaces.
.It Xr iwm 4
Intel Dual Band Wireless AC PCIe Mini Card network interfaces.
.It Xr iwn 4
Intel Wireless WiFi Link 4965/5000/1000 and Centrino Wireless-N 1000/2000/6000
PCIe Mini network interfaces.
.It Xr malo 4
Marvell Libertas 88W8335/88W8310/88W8385 802.11b/g wireless network interfaces.
.It Xr ral 4
Ralink Technology RT2500/RT2600-based 802.11a/b/g wireless network interfaces.
.It Xr rtw 4
Realtek RTL8180L 802.11b wireless network interfaces.
.It Xr rtwn 4
Realtek RTL8188CE/RTL8192CE 802.11b/g/n wireless network interfaces.
.It Xr wi 4
WaveLAN/IEEE and PRISM-II 802.11 wireless interfaces.
.It Xr wpi 4
Intel PRO/Wireless 3945ABG Mini PCI Express network adapters.
.El
.Ss Serial interfaces
.Bl -tag -width pcdisplay(4) -offset indent
.It Xr cy 4
Cyclades Cyclom-4Y, -8Y, and -16Y multi-port serial interfaces.
.It Xr cz 4
Cyclades-Z series multi-port serial interfaces.
.El
.Ss Audio devices
.Bl -tag -width pcdisplay(4) -offset indent
.It Xr auacer 4
Acer Labs M5455 I/O Controller Hub integrated AC'97 audio device.
.It Xr auich 4
Intel I/O Controller Hub integrated AC'97 audio device.
.It Xr auvia 4
VIA VT82C686A integrated AC'97 audio device.
.It Xr autri 4
Trident 4DWAVE-DX/NX, SiS 7018, ALi M5451 AC'97 audio device.
.It Xr clcs 4
Cirrus Logic CS4280 audio device.
.It Xr clct 4
Cirrus Logic CS4281 audio device.
.It Xr cmpci 4
C-Media CMI8x38 audio device.
.It Xr eap 4
Ensoniq AudioPCI audio device.
.It Xr emuxki 4
Creative Labs SBLive! and PCI 512 audio device.
.It Xr esa 4
ESS Technology Allegro-1 / Maestro-3 audio device.
.It Xr esm 4
ESS Maestro-1/2/2e PCI AC'97 Audio Accelerator audio device.
.It Xr eso 4
ESS Solo-1 PCI AudioDrive audio device.
.It Xr fms 4
Forte Media FM801 audio device.
.It Xr hdaudio 4
High Definition Audio Specification 1.0 device.
.It Xr neo 4
NeoMagic MagicMedia 256 audio device.
.It Xr sv 4
S3 SonicVibes audio device.
.It Xr yds 4
Yamaha YMF724/740/744/754-based audio device.
.El
.Ss Bridges
.Bl -tag -width pcdisplay(4) -offset indent
.It Xr cbb 4
PCI Yenta compatible CardBus bridges.
.It Xr pceb 4
Generic PCI-EISA bridges; see
.Xr eisa 4 .
.It Xr pcib 4
Generic PCI-ISA bridges; see
.Xr isa 4 .
.It Xr ppb 4
Generic PCI bridges, including expansion backplanes.
.El
.Ss Miscellaneous devices
.Bl -tag -width pcdisplay(4) -offset indent
.It Xr bktr 4
Brooktree 848 compatible TV cards.
.It Xr ehci 4
USB EHCI host controllers.
.It Xr gtp 4
Gemtek PCI FM radio devices.
.It Xr ibmcd 4
IBM 4810 BSP cash drawer ports.
.It Xr iop 4
I2O I/O processors.
.It Xr oboe 4
Toshiba OBOE IrDA SIR/FIR controller.
.It Xr ohci 4
USB OHCI host controllers.
.It Xr pcic 4
PCMCIA controllers, including the Cirrus Logic GD6729.
.It Xr puc 4
PCI
.Dq universal
communications cards, containing
.Xr com 4
and
.Xr lpt 4
communications ports.
.It Xr uhci 4
USB UHCI host controllers.
.It Xr virtio 4
Para-virtualized I/O in a virtual machine.
.It Xr vga 4
VGA graphics boards.
.It Xr xhci 4
USB XHCI host controllers.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pci 3 ,
.Xr agp 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pcictl 8 ,
.Xr pci 9
.Sh HISTORY
The machine-independent PCI subsystem appeared in
.Nx 1.2 .
