.\"	$NetBSD: pciide.4,v 1.24 2000/08/02 21:49:41 bouyer Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Manuel Bouyer.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. 
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,    
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 15, 1998
.Dt PCIIDE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm PCIIDE
.Nd PCI IDE disk controllers driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pciide* at pci? dev ? function ? flags 0x0000"
.Cd "pciide* at pnpbios? index ?"
.Cd "options PCIIDE_CMD064x_DISABLE"
.Cd "options PCIIDE_AMD756_ENABLEDMA"
.Cd "options PCIIDE_CMD0646U_ENABLEUDMA"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm pciide
driver supports the PCI IDE controllers as specified in the
"PCI IDE controller specification, revision 1.0" draft, and provides the core
functions for the
.Nm wd
and
.Nm atapi
drivers. This driver include specific, enhanced support for the CMD Tech
PCI0640 controller, and IDE DMA/Ultra-DMA support for the following
controllers:
.Bl -dash -compact -offset indent
.It
Acer labs M5229 IDE Controller
.It
Advanced Micro Devices AMD-756 IDE Controllers
.It
CMD Tech PCI0643, PCI0646, PCI0648 and PCI0649 IDE Controllers
.It
Contaq Microsystems/Cypress CY82C693 IDE Controller
.It
HighPoint HPT366 Ultra/66 and HPT370 Ultra/100 (in Ultra/66 mode) IDE controller
.It
Intel PIIX, PIIX3 and PIIX4 IDE Controllers
.It
Intel 82801 (ICH/ICH0) IDE Controllers
.It
OPTi 82c621 (plus a few of its derivatives) IDE Controllers
.It
Promise PDC20246 (Ultra/33), PDC20262 (Ultra/66), and Ultra100 (in Ultra/66
mode only) PCI IDE controllers
.It
Silicon Integrated System 5597/5598 IDE controller
.It
VIA Technologies VT82C586 and VT82C586A IDE Controllers
.El 
Some of these controllers are only available in multifunction PCI chips.
.Pp
The 0x0001 flag forces the
.Nm 
driver to use DMA when there is no explicit DMA mode setting support for
the controller but DMA is present. If the BIOS didn't set up the controller
properly, this can cause a machine hang.
.Sh BUGS
There's no way to reliably know if a PCI064x controller is enabled or not.
If the driver finds a PCI064x, it will assume it is enabled unless the
PCIIDE_CMD064x_DISABLE option is specified in the kernel config file.
This will be a problem only if the controller has been disabled in the BIOS
and another controller has been installed and uses the ISA legacy I/O ports
and interrupts.
.Pp
The PCI0646U controller is known to be buggy with Ultra-DMA transfers, so
Ultra-DMA is disabled by default for this controller. To enable Ultra-DMA,
use the PCIIDE_CMD0646U_ENABLEUDMA option. Ultra-DMA can eventually be
disabled on a per-drive basis with config flags, see
.Xr wd 4 .

.Pp
The AMD756 chip revision D2 has a bug affecting DMA (but not Ultra-DMA)
modes.  The workaround documented by AMD is to not use DMA on any drive which
does not support Ultra-DMA modes.  This does not appear to be necessary on all
drives, the PCIIDE_AMD756_ENABLEDMA option can be used to force multiword DMA
on the buggy revisions.  Multiword DMA can eventually be disabled on a
per-drive basis with config flags, see
.Xr wd 4 .
The bug, if triggered, will cause a total system hang.
.Pp
The timings used for the PIO and DMA modes for controllers listed above
are for a PCI bus running at 30 or 33 Mhz (except the OPTi controller,
which supports both 25 and 33 Mhz PCI bus timings). This driver may not
work properly on overclocked systems.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr pnpbios 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr wd 4 ,
.Xr wdc 4
