.\"	$NetBSD: route.4,v 1.31.4.1 2018/07/28 04:37:24 pgoyette Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)route.4	8.6 (Berkeley) 4/19/94
.\"
.Dd July 11, 2018
.Dt ROUTE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm route
.Nd kernel packet forwarding database
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/socket.h
.In net/if.h
.In net/route.h
.Ft int
.Fn socket PF_ROUTE SOCK_RAW "int family"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ux
provides some packet routing facilities.
The kernel maintains a routing information database, which
is used in selecting the appropriate network interface when
transmitting packets.
.Pp
A user process (or possibly multiple co-operating processes)
maintains this database by sending messages over a special kind
of socket.
This supplants fixed size
.Xr ioctl 2 Ns 's
used in earlier releases.
Routing table changes may only be carried out by the super user.
.Pp
The operating system may spontaneously emit routing messages in response
to external events, such as receipt of a redirect, or failure to
locate a suitable route for a request.
The message types are described in greater detail below.
.Pp
Routing database entries come in two flavors: for a specific
host, or for all hosts on a generic subnetwork (as specified
by a bit mask and value under the mask.
The effect of wildcard or default route may be achieved by using
a mask of all zeros, and there may be hierarchical routes.
.Pp
When the system is booted and addresses are assigned
to the network interfaces, each protocol family
installs a routing table entry for each interface when it is ready for traffic.
Normally the protocol specifies the route
through each interface as a
.Dq direct
connection to the destination host
or network.
If the route is direct, the transport layer of a protocol family
usually requests the packet be sent to the same host specified in
the packet.
Otherwise, the interface is requested to address the packet to the
gateway listed in the routing entry (i.e. the packet is forwarded).
.Pp
When routing a packet,
the kernel will attempt to find
the most specific route matching the destination.
(If there are two different mask and value-under-the-mask pairs
that match, the more specific is the one with more bits in the mask.
A route to a host is regarded as being supplied with a mask of
as many ones as there are bits in the destination).
If no entry is found, the destination is declared to be unreachable,
and a routing\-miss message is generated if there are any
listeners on the routing control socket described below.
.Pp
A wildcard routing entry is specified with a zero
destination address value, and a mask of all zeroes.
Wildcard routes will be used
when the system fails to find other routes matching the
destination.
The combination of wildcard routes and routing redirects can provide
an economical mechanism for routing traffic.
.Pp
One opens the channel for passing routing control messages
by using the socket call shown in the synopsis above:
.Pp
The
.Fa family
parameter may be
.Dv AF_UNSPEC
which will provide
routing information for all address families, or can be restricted
to a specific address family by specifying which one is desired.
There can be more than one routing socket open per system.
.Pp
Messages are formed by a header followed by a small
number of sockaddrs (now variable length particularly
in the
.Tn ISO
case), interpreted by position, and delimited
by the new length entry in the sockaddr.
An example of a message with four addresses might be an
.Tn ISO
redirect:
Destination, Netmask, Gateway, and Author of the redirect.
The interpretation of which address are present is given by a
bit mask within the header, and the sequence is least significant
to most significant bit within the vector.
.Pp
Any messages sent to the kernel are returned, and copies are sent
to all interested listeners.
The exception to this is a new address marked as tentative, where copies
will be sent once Duplicate Address Detection has completed and
the tentative flag cleared or the duplicated flag set.
Also, new address messages will also be emitted when other flags on the address
change such as deprecated and detached.
The kernel will provide the process ID for the sender, and the
sender may use an additional sequence field to distinguish between
outstanding messages.
However, message replies may be lost when kernel buffers are exhausted.
.Pp
The kernel may reject certain messages, and will indicate this
by filling in the
.Fa rtm_errno
field.
The routing code returns
.Er EEXIST
if
requested to duplicate an existing entry,
.Er ESRCH
if
requested to delete a non-existent entry,
or
.Er ENOBUFS
if insufficient resources were available
to install a new route.
In the current implementation, all routing processes run locally,
and the values for
.Fa rtm_errno
are available through the normal
.Em errno
mechanism, even if the routing reply message is lost.
.Pp
A process may avoid the expense of reading replies to
its own messages by issuing a
.Xr setsockopt 2
call indicating that the
.Dv SO_USELOOPBACK
option
at the
.Dv SOL_SOCKET
level is to be turned off.
A process may ignore all messages from the routing socket
by doing a
.Xr shutdown 2
system call for further input.
.Pp
A process can specify which route message types it's interested in by passing
an array of route messsage types to the
.Xr setsockopt 2
call with the
.Dv RO_MSGFILTER
option at the
.Dv PF_ROUTE
level.
For example, to only get specific messages:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
unsigned char rtfilter[] = { RTM_IFINFO, RTM_IFANNOUNCE };

if (setsockopt(routefd, PF_ROUTE, RO_MSGFILTER,
    &rtfilter, (socklen_t)sizeof(rtfilter)) == -1)
	err(1, "setsockopt(RO_MSGFILTER)");
.Ed
.Pp
If a route is in use when it is deleted,
the routing entry will be marked down and removed from the routing table,
but the resources associated with it will not
be reclaimed until all references to it are released.
User processes can obtain information about the routing
entry to a specific destination by using a
.Dv RTM_GET
message,
or by reading the
.Pa /dev/kmem
device, or by calling
.Xr sysctl 3 .
.Pp
The messages are:
.Bd -literal
#define	RTM_ADD		0x1    /* Add Route */
#define	RTM_DELETE	0x2    /* Delete Route */
#define	RTM_CHANGE	0x3    /* Change Metrics, Flags, or Gateway */
#define	RTM_GET		0x4    /* Report Information */
#define	RTM_LOSING	0x5    /* Kernel Suspects Partitioning */
#define	RTM_REDIRECT	0x6    /* Told to use different route */
#define	RTM_MISS	0x7    /* Lookup failed on this address */
#define RTM_LOCK	0x8	/* fix specified metrics */
#define RTM_OLDADD	0x9	/* caused by SIOCADDRT */
#define RTM_OLDDEL	0xa	/* caused by SIOCDELRT */
#define	RTM_ONEWADDR	0xc    /* Old (pre-8.0) RTM_NEWADDR message */
// #define RTM_RESOLVE	0xb	/* req to resolve dst to LL addr */
#define	RTM_ODELADDR	0xd    /* Old (pre-8.0) RTM_DELADDR message */
#define	RTM_OOIFINFO	0xe    /* Old (pre-1.5) RTM_IFINFO message */
#define	RTM_OIFINFO	0xf    /* Old (pre-6.0) RTM_IFINFO message */
#define	RTM_IFANNOUNCE	0x10   /* iface arrival/departure */
#define	RTM_IEEE80211	0x11	/* IEEE80211 wireless event */
#define	RTM_SETGATE	0x12	/* set prototype gateway for clones
				 * (see example in arp_rtrequest).
				 */
#define	RTM_LLINFO_UPD	0x13	/* indication to ARP/NDP/etc. that link-layer
				 * address has changed
				 */
#define	RTM_IFINFO	0x14   /* iface/link going up/down etc. */
#define	RTM_OCHGADDR	0x15   /* Old (pre-8.0) RTM_CHGADDR message */
#define	RTM_NEWADDR	0x16   /* address being added to iface */
#define	RTM_DELADDR	0x17   /* address being removed from iface */
#define	RTM_CHGADDR	0x18   /* address properties changed */
.Ed
.Pp
A message header consists of one of the following:
.Bd -literal
struct rt_msghdr {
    u_short rtm_msglen;        /* to skip over non-understood messages */
    u_char  rtm_version;       /* future binary compatibility */
    u_char  rtm_type;          /* message type */
    u_short rtm_index;         /* index for associated ifp */
    int     rtm_flags;         /* flags, incl kern & message, e.g. DONE */
    int     rtm_addrs;         /* bitmask identifying sockaddrs in msg */
    pid_t   rtm_pid;           /* identify sender */
    int     rtm_seq;           /* for sender to identify action */
    int     rtm_errno;         /* why failed */
    int     rtm_use;           /* from rtentry */
    u_long  rtm_inits;         /* which metrics we are initializing */
    struct  rt_metrics rtm_rmx;	/* metrics themselves */
};

struct if_msghdr {
    u_short ifm_msglen;        /* to skip over non-understood messages */
    u_char  ifm_version;       /* future binary compatibility */
    u_char  ifm_type;          /* message type */
    int     ifm_addrs;         /* like rtm_addrs */
    int     ifm_flags;         /* value of if_flags */
    u_short ifm_index;         /* index for associated ifp */
    struct  if_data ifm_data;  /* statistics and other data about if */
};

struct ifa_msghdr {
    u_short ifam_msglen;       /* to skip over non-understood messages */
    u_char  ifam_version;      /* future binary compatibility */
    u_char  ifam_type;         /* message type */
    u_short ifam_index;        /* index for associated ifp */
    int     ifam_flags;        /* value of ifa_flags */
    int     ifam_addrs;        /* like rtm_addrs */
    pid_t   ifam_pid;          /* identify sender */
    int     ifam_addrflags;    /* family specific address flags */
    int     ifam_metric;       /* value of ifa_metric */
};

struct if_announcemsghdr {
    u_short ifan_msglen;       /* to skip over non-understood messages */
    u_char  ifan_version;      /* future binary compatibility */
    u_char  ifan_type;         /* message type */
    u_short ifan_index;        /* index for associated ifp */
    char    ifan_name[IFNAMSIZ]; /* if name, e.g. "en0" */
    u_short ifan_what;         /* what type of announcement */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Dv RTM_IFINFO
message uses a
.Vt if_msghdr
header, the
.Dv RTM_NEWADDR ,
.Dv RTM_CHGADDR ,
and
.Dv RTM_DELADDR
messages use a
.Vt ifa_msghdr
header,
the
.Dv RTM_IFANNOUNCE
message uses a
.Vt if_announcemsghdr
header,
and all other messages use the
.Vt rt_msghdr
header.
.Pp
The metrics structure is:
.Bd -literal
struct rt_metrics {
    u_long rmx_locks;          /* Kernel must leave these values alone */
    u_long rmx_mtu;            /* MTU for this path */
    u_long rmx_hopcount;       /* max hops expected */
    u_long rmx_expire;         /* lifetime for route, e.g. redirect */
    u_long rmx_recvpipe;       /* inbound delay-bandwidth product */
    u_long rmx_sendpipe;       /* outbound delay-bandwidth product */
    u_long rmx_ssthresh;       /* outbound gateway buffer limit */
    u_long rmx_rtt;            /* estimated round trip time */
    u_long rmx_rttvar;         /* estimated rtt variance */
    u_long rmx_pksent;         /* packets sent using this route */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Flags include the values:
.Bd -literal
#define	RTF_UP        0x1       /* route usable */
#define	RTF_GATEWAY   0x2       /* destination is a gateway */
#define	RTF_HOST      0x4       /* host entry (net otherwise) */
#define	RTF_REJECT    0x8       /* host or net unreachable */
#define	RTF_DYNAMIC   0x10      /* created dynamically (by redirect) */
#define	RTF_MODIFIED  0x20      /* modified dynamically (by redirect) */
#define	RTF_DONE      0x40      /* message confirmed */
#define	RTF_MASK      0x80      /* subnet mask present */
#define RTF_CONNECTED 0x100     /* hosts on this route are neighbours */
#define RTF_LLDATA    0x400     /* used by apps to add/del L2 entries */
#define	RTF_STATIC    0x800     /* manually added */
#define	RTF_BLACKHOLE 0x1000    /* just discard pkts (during updates) */
#define	RTF_PROTO2    0x4000    /* protocol specific routing flag */
#define	RTF_PROTO1    0x8000    /* protocol specific routing flag */
#define	RTF_SRC       0x10000   /* route has fixed source address */
#define	RTF_ANNOUNCE  0x20000   /* announce new ARP or NDP entry */
#define	RTF_LOCAL     0x40000   /* route represents a local address */
#define	RTF_BROADCAST 0x80000   /* route represents a bcast address */
.Ed
.Pp
Specifiers for metric values in rmx_locks and rtm_inits are:
.Bd -literal
#define	RTV_MTU       0x1    /* init or lock _mtu */
#define	RTV_HOPCOUNT  0x2    /* init or lock _hopcount */
#define	RTV_EXPIRE    0x4    /* init or lock _expire */
#define	RTV_RPIPE     0x8    /* init or lock _recvpipe */
#define	RTV_SPIPE     0x10   /* init or lock _sendpipe */
#define	RTV_SSTHRESH  0x20   /* init or lock _ssthresh */
#define	RTV_RTT       0x40   /* init or lock _rtt */
#define	RTV_RTTVAR    0x80   /* init or lock _rttvar */
.Ed
.Pp
Specifiers for which addresses are present in the messages are:
.Bd -literal
#define RTA_DST       0x1    /* destination sockaddr present */
#define RTA_GATEWAY   0x2    /* gateway sockaddr present */
#define RTA_NETMASK   0x4    /* netmask sockaddr present */
#define RTA_GENMASK   0x8    /* cloning mask sockaddr present */
#define RTA_IFP       0x10   /* interface name sockaddr present */
#define RTA_IFA       0x20   /* interface addr sockaddr present */
#define RTA_AUTHOR    0x40   /* sockaddr for author of redirect */
#define RTA_BRD       0x80   /* for NEWADDR, broadcast or p-p dest addr */
#define RTA_TAG       0x100  /* route tag */
.Ed
.Pp
Flags for IPv6 addresses:
.Bd -literal
#define IN6_IFF_ANYCAST		0x01	/* anycast address */
#define IN6_IFF_TENTATIVE	0x02	/* tentative address */
#define IN6_IFF_DUPLICATED	0x04	/* DAD detected duplicate */
#define IN6_IFF_DETACHED	0x08	/* may be detached from the link */
#define IN6_IFF_DEPRECATED	0x10	/* deprecated address */
#define IN6_IFF_NODAD		0x20	/* don't perform DAD on this address
					 * (used only at first SIOC* call)
					 */
#define IN6_IFF_AUTOCONF	0x40	/* autoconfigurable address. */
#define IN6_IFF_TEMPORARY	0x80	/* temporary (anonymous) address. */
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr sysctl 3
.Sh HISTORY
Since
.Nx 8.0 ,
.Cm RTF_CLONED ,
.Cm RTF_CLONING ,
.Cm RTF_LLINFO ,
.Cm RTF_XRESOLVE
and
.Cm RTM_RESOLVE
were obsolete.
.Cm RTF_CONNECTED
and
.Cm RTF_LLDATA
appeared in
.Nx 8.0 .
.Pp
.Vt ifa_msghdr
gained the fields ifam_pid and ifam_addrflags in
.Nx 8.0 .
