.\"	$NetBSD: sb.4,v 1.8 1997/07/28 00:23:11 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by John T. Kohl.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 4, 1995
.Dt SB 4
.Os NetBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm sb
.Nd SoundBlaster family (and compatible) audio device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "sb0 at isa? port 0x220 irq 5 drq 1"
.Cd "sb1 at isa? port 0x240 irq 7 drq 1 flags 1"
.Cd "sb2 at isapnp?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the SoundBlaster, SoundBlaster Pro,
SoundBlaster 16, Jazz 16, and hardware register-level compatible audio cards.
.Pp
The SoundBlaster series are half-duplex cards, capable of 8- and 16-bit
audio sample recording and playback at rates up to 44.1kHz (depending on
the particular model).
.Pp
The base I/O port address is usually jumper-selected to either 0x220 or
0x240 (newer cards may provide software configuration, but this driver
does not directly support them--you must configure the card for its I/O
addresses with other software).  The SoundBlaster takes 16 I/O ports.
For the SoundBlaster and SoundBlaster Pro, the IRQ and DRQ channels are
jumper-selected.  For the SoundBlaster 16, the IRQ and DRQ channels are
set by this driver to the values specified in the config file.  The IRQ
must be selected from the set {5,7,9,10}.
.Pp
The configuration file must use 1
.Cm flags
specification to enable the Jazz16 support.  This is to avoid potential
conflicts with other devices when probing the Jazz 16 because it requires
use of extra I/O ports not in the base port range.
.Pp
The joystick interface (if enabled by a jumper) is handled by the
.Xr joy 4
driver, and the optional SCSI CD-ROM interface is handled by the
.Xr aic 4
driver.
.Sh BUGS
The 16 bit DMA channel is always channel 5.  This is because there
is currently no way to specify a second drq in the config file.
.Pp
The FM synthesizer, MIDI port, and non-SCSI CD-ROM interfaces are not
supported.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr aic 4 ,
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr joy 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver appeared in
.Nx 1.0 .
