.\" $NetBSD: sgp40mox.4,v 1.2 2021/10/14 21:35:45 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Brad Spencer <brad@anduin.eldar.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd October 7, 2021
.Dt SGP40MOX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sgp40mox
.Nd Driver for Sensirion SGP40 MOx gas sensor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "sgp40mox* at iic? addr 0x59"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides an air quality measurement from the SGP40
sensor via the
.Xr envsys 4
framework.
The
.Nm
.Ar addr
argument selects the address at the
.Xr iic 4
bus.
The crc validity and temperature and %RH compensation can be changed through
.Xr sysctl 8
nodes.
.Pp
In order to calculate the VOC index, the volatile organic compounds index, which
is the measure of air quality the sensor is polled once a second and the raw sensor
value is fed into the Sensirion VOC algorithm.
This VOC algorithm used in this driver is licensed under a 3 clause
BSD license and was pulled from the Sensirion Github repository at
.Rs
.%U https://github.com/Sensirion/embedded-sgp
.Re
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following
.Xr sysctl 3
variables are provided:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Li hw.sgp40mox0.compensation.temperature
This should be set to the temperature in Celsius of the environment that the sensor
is in.
The valid values are from -45 to 130 degrees Celsius.
.It Li hw.sgp40mox0.compensation.humidity
This should be set to the %RH of the environment that the sensor is in.
The valid values are from 0 to 100.
.Pp
For the best performance of the VOC algorithm it is important that the temperature
and %RH compensation values be current and set using the
.Xr sysctl 3
variables mentioned above.
This data will need to be pulled from another source, such as a another sensor in
the environment that the SGP40 is in.
.It Li hw.sgp40mox0.ignorecrc
If set, the crc calculation will be ignored on the calls to the chip for the purposes
of measurement.
.It Li hw.sgp40mox0.debug
If the driver is compiled with
.Dv SGP40_DEBUG ,
this node will appear and can be used to set the debugging level.
.It Li hw.sgp40mox0.readattempts
To read the air quality metric from the chip requires that the command be sent,
then a delay must be observed before a read can be done to get the values
back.
The delays are documented in the data sheet for the chip.
The driver will attempt to read back the values readattempts number of
times.
The default is 10 which should be more than enough for most purposes.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr envsys 4 ,
.Xr iic 4 ,
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Brad Spencer Aq Mt brad@anduin.eldar.org .
.Sh BUGS
The driver does not make complete use of the VOC algorithm.
In particular, there is no need to restart the algorithm from
scratch if there is a stoppage of polling for less than 10 minutes.
The driver does not have the ability to determine that, and therefore
assumes that the sensor is completely cold each time the driver attaches to the chip.
.Pp
The temperature and humidity compensation could be allowed to contain fractional degrees Celsius
and %RH.
The driver only supports setting whole numbers for either of those.
