.\" $NetBSD: speaker.4,v 1.30 2020/07/05 03:44:13 uwe Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Nathanial Sloss <nathanialsloss@yahoo.com.au>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Christopher G. Demetriou
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"          This product includes software developed for the
.\"          NetBSD Project.  See http://www.NetBSD.org/ for
.\"          information about NetBSD.
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" <<Id: LICENSE,v 1.2 2000/06/14 15:57:33 cgd Exp>>
.\"
.Dd June 13, 2017
.Dt SPEAKER 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm speaker
.Nd console speaker audio device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "spkr*	at pcppi?"
.Cd "spkr*	at audio?"
.Pp
.In dev/spkrio.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The speaker device driver allows applications to control the console
speaker on machines with a PC-like 8253 timer implementation or a synthesized
speaker from an audio device/soundcard.
.Pp
Only one process may have this device open at any given time;
.Xr open 2
and
.Xr close 2
are used to lock and relinquish it.
An attempt to
.Xr open 2
when another process has the device locked will return \-1 with an
.Er EBUSY
error indication.
Writes to the device are interpreted as
.Dq play strings
in a simple
.Tn ASCII
melody notation.
An
.Fn ioctl
for tone generation at arbitrary frequencies is also supported.
.Pp
For the
.Xr pcppi 4
device sound-generation does
.Em not
monopolize the processor; in fact, the driver
spends most of its time sleeping while the PC hardware is emitting
tones.
Other processes may emit beeps while the driver is running.
.Pp
For the audio device speaker, the speaker uses one of the virtual audio
channels.
Enabling this device will also provide a
.Xr wsbell 4
keyboard bell.
.Pp
Applications may call
.Fn ioctl
on a speaker file descriptor to control the speaker driver directly;
definitions for the
.Fn ioctl
interface are in
.In dev/spkrio.h .
.Pp
The
.Vt tone_t
structure is as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef struct {
	int	frequency;	/* in hertz */
	int	duration;	/* in 1/100ths of a second */
} tone_t;
.Ed
.Pp
A frequency of zero is interpreted as a rest.
.Pp
At present there are four ioctls:
.Bl -tag -width Dv
.It Dv SPKRGETVOL
Returns an integer, which is the current bell volume as a percentage (0\(en100).
.It Dv SPKRSETVOL
Accepts an integer, which is the desired volume as a percentage.
.It Dv SPKRTONE
Accepts a pointer to a single tone structure as third argument and plays it.
.It Dv SPKRTUNE
Accepts a pointer to the first of an array of tone structures and plays
them in continuous sequence; this array must be terminated by a final member
with a zero duration.
.El
.\"
.Ss Play string language
.\"
The play string language is modelled on the
.Ic PLAY
statement conventions of
.Tn IBM BASIC No 2.0 .
The
.Ic MB ,
.Ic MF
and
.Ic X
commands of
.Ic PLAY
are not useful in a
.Tn UNIX
environment and are not implemented.
The
.Dq octave-tracking
feature is also new.
.Pp
There are 84 accessible notes numbered 1\(en84 in 7 octaves numbered 0\(en6;
octave\~2 starts with middle C.
The tuning is equal-tempered A440.
.Pp
In the initial state the current octave is 4,
the default note duration is quarter notes,
the tempo is 120 bpm,
and the articulation is non-legato or normal,
i.e. half-second notes with the last 1/16th second being
.Dq rest time .
.Pp
Play strings are interpreted left to right as a series of play command groups.
Letter case is ignored.
Whitespace between groups is ignored
and may be used to separate melody sections.
Play command groups are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ic
.It Ic C , D , E , F , G , A , B
Letters
.Sq Ic A
through
.Sq Ic G
cause the corresponding note to be played in the current octave.
A note letter may optionally be followed by an
.Em accidental sign ,
one of
.Sq Ic \&# ,
.Sq Ic \&+ ,
or
.Sq Ic \&- ;
the first two of these cause it to be sharped one
half-tone, the last causes it to be flatted one half-tone.
It may also be
followed by a time value number and by sustain dots (see below).
Time values are interpreted as for the
.Sq Ic L
command below;.
.\"
.It Ic O Ns Ar n , Ic OL , Ic ON
If
.Ar n
is numeric, this sets the current octave.
.Sq Ic OL
enables, and
.Sq Ic ON
disables
.Em octave-tracking
(it is disabled by default).
When octave-tracking is on, interpretation of a pair of letter notes will
change octaves if necessary in order to make the smallest possible jump between
notes.
Thus
.Dq Li olbc
will be played as
.Dq Li olb>c ,
and
.Dq Li olcb
as
.Dq Li olc<b .
Octave tracking is temporarily disabled for one letter note that follows
.Sq Ic \&> ,
.Sq Ic \&<
or
.Sq Ic O Ns Ar n .
.\"
.It Ic \&>
Bump the current octave up one.
.\"
.It Ic \&<
Drop the current octave down one.
.\"
.It Ic N Ns Ar n
Play note
.Ar n ,
.Ar n
being 1 to 84 or 0 for a rest of current time value.
May be followed by sustain dots.
.\"
.It Ic L Ns Ar n
Sets the current time value for notes.
The default is
.Dq Li L4 ,
quarter notes.
The lowest possible value is 1; values up to 64 are accepted.
.Dq Li L1
sets whole notes,
.Dq Li L2
sets half notes,
.Dq Li L4
sets quarter notes, etc...
.\"
.It Ic P Ns Ar n , Ic \&~ Ns Ar n
Pause (rest), with
.Ar n
interpreted as for
.Sq Ic L .
May be followed by sustain dots.
.\"
.It Ic T Ns Ar n
Sets the number of quarter notes per minute; default is 120.
Musical names for common tempi are:
.Bl -column "very slow" "Larghissimo" "999\(en999" -offset indent
.It           Ta Sy "Tempo"  Ta Sy "BPM"
.It very slow Ta Larghissimo Ta ""
.It           Ta Largo       Ta 40\(en60
.It           Ta Larghetto   Ta 60\(en66
.It           Ta Grave       Ta ""
.It           Ta Lento       Ta ""
.It           Ta Adagio      Ta 66\(en76
.It slow      Ta Adagietto   Ta ""
.It           Ta Andante     Ta 76\(en108
.It medium    Ta Andantino   Ta ""
.It           Ta Moderato    Ta 108\(en120
.It fast      Ta Allegretto  Ta ""
.It           Ta Allegro     Ta 120\(en168
.It           Ta Vivace      Ta ""
.It           Ta Veloce      Ta ""
.It           Ta Presto      Ta 168\(en208
.It very fast Ta Prestissimo Ta ""
.El
.\"
.It Ic ML , Ic MN , Ic MS
Set articulation.
.Sq Ic MN
(for normal) is the default; the last 1/8th of
the note's value is rest time.
You can set
.Sq Ic ML
for legato (no rest time) or
.Sq Ic MS
for staccato (1/4 rest time).
.El
.Pp
Notes, that is,
.Ic C , D , E , F , G , A , B ,
or
.Ic N
command character groups, may be followed by sustain dots.
Each dot causes the note's value to be lengthened by one-half
for each one.
Thus, a note dotted once is held for 3/2 of its undotted value;
dotted twice, it is held 9/4, and three times would give 27/8.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa -compact
.It Pa /dev/speaker
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audio 4 ,
.Xr pcppi 4 ,
.Xr wsbell 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
This
.Nm
device was originally for the pcppi PC timer interface.
Support was added for a synthesized device by Nathanial Sloss, first appearing
in
.Nx 8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Eric S. Raymond Aq Mt esr@snark.thyrsus.com
.Sh BUGS
Due to roundoff in the pitch tables and slop in the tone-generation and timer
hardware (neither of which was designed for precision), neither pitch accuracy
nor timings will be mathematically exact.
.Pp
There is no volume control.
.Pp
The action of two or more sustain dots does not reflect standard musical
notation, in which each dot adds half the value of the previous dot
modifier, not half the value of the note as modified.
Thus, a note dotted
once is held for 3/2 of its undotted value; dotted twice, it is held 7/4,
and three times would give 15/8.
The multiply-by-3/2 interpretation,
however, is specified in the
.Tn IBM BASIC
manual and has been retained for compatibility.
.Pp
In play strings which are very long (longer than your system's physical I/O
blocks) note suffixes or numbers may occasionally be parsed incorrectly due
to crossing a block boundary.
