.\"	$NetBSD: swsensor.4,v 1.4 2010/12/11 15:49:34 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Paul Goyette.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 9, 2010
.Dt SWSENSOR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm swsensor
.Nd software environmental sensor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pseudo-device swsensor"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides a software environmental sensor that works with
.Xr  sysctl 8
and
.Xr envstat 8 .
The driver is intended to be loaded as a kernel module.
One can, however, include the
.Nm
driver directly in a kernel using the configuration from the synopsis.
By default, the sensor is of type
.Dv ENVSYS_UNITS_INTEGER .
.Pp
The following integer values can be specified in the
.Xr modload 8
command when loading the
.Nm
module to alter the driver's behavior.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "variable"
.It Sy "Variable" Sy "Usage"
.It Li "mode"
Controls whether or not
.Nm
provides internally-maintained limits and limit checking
.Bl -tag -width "Value"
.It Sy "Value" Sy "Meaning"
.It Li "0"
sensor has no internally-maintained limits
.It Li "1"
sensor provides its own internal limit value
.It Li "2"
sensor maintains an internal adjustable limit and performs its own
comparison between the sensor's limit and its current value
.El
.It Li "limit"
The initial limit value, if limit emulation is selected (ie, if
.Dv mode
is set to 1 or 2)
.It Li "type"
Override the sensor's unit/type.
.El
.Pp
For example,
.Dl Ic modload -i type=1 swsensor
will create a sensor of type
.Dv ENVSYS_UNITS_SFANRPM ,
while
.Dl Ic modload -i mode=1 -i limit=50 swsensor
will create a sensor which has an initial, device-provided limit of 50.
.Pp
The sensor's raw value can be manually updated by modifying the
.Xr sysctl 8
variable
.Dq hw.swsensor.cur_value .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr modctl 2 ,
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Paul Goyette
and first appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver emulates a device with only a single sensor.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can only emulate one hardware-managed limit; this is assumed to
be the
.Dv critical-min
limit.
