.\"	$NetBSD: tea5767radio.4,v 1.2 2018/07/28 07:51:53 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Karuna Grewal.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 6, 2018
.Dt TEA5767RADIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tea5767
.Nd Philips/NXP TEA5767 FM Chip
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "tea5767radio* at iic? addr 0x60 flags 0x00"
.Cd "radio* at tea5767radio?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Philips/NXP TEA5767 FM stereo radio.
.Pp
The
.Nm
can tune in the range 87.5 \- 108.0 MHz, perform hardware signal search
and supports mono/stereo toggling.
.Pp
The flags control the FM Band, XTAL, and PLL values as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0x01
Sets the FM Band to Japan.
.It 0x02
Sets the PLL bit.
.It 0x04
Sets the XTAL bit.
.It 0x08
Force enables hardware search support.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iic 4 ,
.Xr radio 4 ,
.Xr radio 9
.Rs
.%A TEA5767
.%T Low-power FM stereo radio
.%N Rev. 05
.%D 26 January 2007
.Re
.Sh CAVEATS
Many popular TEA5767 evaluation boards feature low quality 32.768kHz crystals.
The inaccuracy of these crystals may often lead to malfunction of the hardware
search funciton.
Therefore, the
.Nm
driver tries to detect the crystal quality during attachment.
If the crystal
of insufficient accuracy was detected, the hardware search function is disabled.
It can be forcefully re-enabled by setting the 0x08 flag.
