.\"	$NetBSD: tlp.4,v 1.11 2003/02/14 15:20:20 grant Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999, 2000 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Jason R. Thorpe of the Numerical Aerospace Simulation Facility,
.\" NASA Ames Research Center.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 4, 1999
.Dt TLP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tlp
.Nd DECchip 21x4x and clone Ethernet interfaces device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "tlp* at eisa? slot ?"
.Cd "tlp* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Cd "tlp* at cardbus? dev ? function ?"
.Pp
.Cd "options TLP_MATCH_21040"
.Cd "options TLP_MATCH_21041"
.Cd "options TLP_MATCH_21140"
.Cd "options TLP_MATCH_21142"
.Pp
Configuration of PHYs may also be necessary.  See
.Xr mii 4 .
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports Ethernet interfaces based on the DECchip 21x4x
.Dq Tulip
(DEC fourth generation Ethernet controller) and a variety of clone chips.
The Tulip has several features designed to make it flexible and reduce
CPU usage:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Flexible receive filter allowing for 16 perfect matches, 16 perfect
inverse matches, 512-bit hash table plus 1 perfect match, or
512-bit hash table only.
.It
Uniform transmit descriptor architecture, configurable as a ring (allowing
2 buffers per descriptor) or a chain (allowing 1 buffer per descriptor).
.It
Uniform receive descriptor architecture, configurable as a ring (allowing
2 buffers per descriptor) or a chain (allowing 1 buffer per descriptor).
.It
Interrupt pacing; host may chose whether or not completion of processing of
an individual descriptor causes an interrupt.
.It
Support for jumbo packets (by disabling transmit and receive watchdog
timers).
.It
A patented transmit backoff algorithm which solves the Ethernet capture
effect problem.
.It
Flexible bus modes to optimize DMA cycles for various cache sizes and
bus implementations.
.It
Programmable transmit FIFO drain threshold to allow DMA overlap and reduce
time to transmit.
.It
Flexible media attachment facilities.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following chips:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
.Em DECchip 21040
-- This is the original Tulip Ethernet chip.  It supports 10Mb/s speeds
over a built-in serial interface.  The serial interface has support for
10BASE-T and AUI media.  The AUI port may be connected to 10BASE5 AUI
or 10BASE2 BNC connectors, or both, selected by a gang jumper on the
board.  Some boards connect the BNC connector to an external serial
interface.  The driver has no way of knowing this, but the external
serial interface may be selected with the
.Dq manual
media setting.
.Pp
Boards that include this chip include the DEC DE-435, on-board Ethernet on
many DEC AlphaStation and AlphaServer systems, ZNYX ZX312, ZX312T,
ZX314, ZX315, SMC 8432, SMC 8434, ACCTON EN1203, and some Cogent
multi-port boards.
.Pp
This chip also appears on the DEC DE-425 EISA Ethernet board.  This board
is a DECchip 21040 and a PLX PCI glue chip, which provides the interface
to the EISA bus, and special address decoding so that the PCI configuration
space registers of the 21040 are accessible in normal EISA I/O space.
.Pp
The very first versions of this chip were labeled
.Dq DC1003
and
.Dq DC1003 Prototype .
.It
.Em DECchip 21041
-- This is the second chip in the Tulip family, dubbed
.Dq Tulip Plus .
It supports 10Mb/s speeds over a built-in serial interface.  The serial
interface has support for 10BASE-T, 10BASE5 AUI, and 10BASE2 BNC media.
The serial interface also includes support for IEEE 802.3u NWay over
the 10baseT interface, for negotiation of duplex mode with the link
partner.
.Pp
Boards that include this chip include the DEC DE-450 and some SMC boards.
.It
.Em DECchip 21140 and 21140A
-- This is the third chip in the Tulip family, dubbed
.Dq FasterNet .
It supports 10Mb/s speeds with a built-in 10BASE-T encoder/decoder,
and 100Mb/s speeds with a built-in 100BASE PCS function.  Support
for 100BASE-TX and 100BASE-T4 is provided by a built-in scrambler.
Support for 100BASE-FX is possible with an appropriate PMD connected
to the 100BASE PCS.  The 21140 and 21140A also support 10Mb/s and
100Mb/s speeds over an MII interface connected to one or more PHYs.
.Pp
The 21140 and 21140A include a general purpose I/O facility, which
may be used to toggle relays on the board.  This facility is often
used to reset individual board modules (e.g. the MII bus), select
the output path of the chip (e.g. connect the UTP port on the board
to the PHY, built-in 10BASE-T ENDEC, or built-in 100BASE-T PMD), or
detect link status (by reading an output pin on the 100BASE-T magnetics).
.Pp
The 21140 and 21140A use a standardized data structure located in
the SROM to describe how the chip should be programmed for various
media settings, including the internal chip pathway, and GPIO settings.
If the SROM data is not in the standardized format, the device driver
must know specific programming information for that particular board.
.Pp
Boards that include the 21140 and 21140A include the DEC EB140, DE-500XA,
DE-500AA, Asante EtherFast, DaynaPORT BlueStreak, Cogent EM100TX, EM110TX,
EM440T4 multi-port, Kingston KNE100TX, older versions of the NetGear FA-310TX,
SMC 9332, SMC 9334, ZNYX ZX34x multi-port, and Adaptec ANA-6944A/TX multi-port.
.It
.Em DECchip 21142 and 21143
-- These are the fourth and fifth chips in the Tulip family.  While
they have two different chip numbers, the 21142 and 21143 are essentially
identical, with only minor differences related to available technology
at time of manufacture.  Both chips include support for 10Mb/s speeds
over a built-in serial interface, and support for 10Mb/s and 100Mb/s
speeds over an MII interface connected to one or more PHYs.  The
serial interface includes support for 10BASE-T, 10BASE5 AUI, and
10BASE2 BNC media, as well as support for IEEE 802.3u NWay over
the 10BASE-T interface, for negotiation of duplex mode and link
speed with the link partner.
.Pp
The 21143 adds support for 100Mb/s speeds with a built-in
PCS function.  Support for 100BASE-TX and 100BASE-T4 is provided by
a built-in scrambler.  Support for 100BASE-FX is possible with an
appropriate PMD connected to the 100BASE PCS.
.Pp
The 21142 and 21143 include a general purpose I/O facility, which
may be used to toggle relays on the board.  This facility is often
used to reset individual board modules (e.g. the MII bus), select
the output path of the chip (e.g. connect the UTP port on the board
to the PHY, built-in serial interface, or built-in 100BASE-T PMD), or
detect link status (by reading an output pin on the 100BASE-T magnetics).
.Pp
The 21142 and 21143 use a standardized data structure located in
the SROM to describe how the chip should be programmed for various
media settings, including the internal chip pathway, and GPIO settings.
If the SROM data is not in the standardized format, the device driver
must know specific programming information for that particular board.
.Pp
Boards that include the 21142 include the DEC EB142, and on-board Ethernet
on the Digital Personal Workstation (Alpha
.Dq Miata
and x86 models) and several Digital PCs.
.Pp
Boards that include the 21143 include the DEC EB143, DE-500BA, several
commonly-available 100baseFX boards, and the NetGear FA-510c CardBus
card.
.It
.Em Lite-On 82C168 and 82C169
-- These chips, dubbed
.Dq PNIC ,
were some of the first commonly-available Tulip clones,
appearing on low-cost boards when it became difficult for board
vendors to obtain DECchip 21140A parts.  They include support for
10Mb/s speeds over a built-in 10BASE-T encoder/decoder, and 100Mb/s
speeds over a built-in PCS function.  Support for 100BASE-TX and
100BASE-T4 is provided by a built-in scrambler and transceiver
module.  The transceiver module also includes support for NWay,
for negotiating duplex mode and link speed with the link partner.
These chips also include support for 10Mb/s and 100Mb/s speeds over
and MII interface connected to one or more PHYs.
.Pp
These chips also include a GPIO facility, although it is programmed
differently than the 21140's.
.Pp
Unfortunately, these chips seem to be plagued by two unfortunate
hardware bugs: in some situations, the receive logic incorrectly
dumps the entire transmit FIFO into the receive chain, rather
than a single Ethernet frame, and the DMA engines appear to be
substandard; they must be run in store-and-forward mode, and
occasionally fail to upload the filter setup frame.
.Pp
Boards that include the 82C168 and 82C169 include the newer NetGear
FA-310TX, the Kingston KNE110TX, and some older LinkSys LNE100TX boards.
.It
.Em Macronix 98713, 98713A, 98715, 98715A, and 98725
-- Of all the clones, these chips, dubbed
.Dq PMAC ,
are the best.  They are very close clones of their respective
originals, with the exception of some slight programming magic
necessary to work around an apparent hardware bug.
.Pp
The 98713 is a DECchip 21140A clone.  It includes all of the 21140A's
features, and uses the same SROM data format.
.Pp
The 98713A is a half-clone of the DECchip 21143.  It has support for
serial, PCS, and MII media.  The serial interface has a built-in
NWay function.  However, the 98713A does not have a GPIO facility, and,
as a result, usually does not use the same SROM format as the 21143 (no
need for GPIO programming information).
.Pp
The 98715, 98715A, and 98725 are more 21143-like, but lack the GPIO
facility and MII.  These chips also support ACPI power management.
.Pp
Boards that include the Macronix chips include some SVEC boards,
some SOHOWare boards, and the Compex RL100TX.
.It
.Em Lite-On/Macronix 82C115
-- This chip, dubbed the
.Dq PNIC-II ,
was co-designed by Lite-On and Macronix.  It is almost identical to
the Macronix 98725, with a few exceptions: it has Wake-On-LAN support,
uses a 128-bit receive filter hash table, and supports IEEE 802.3x
flow control.
.Pp
Boards that include the 82C115 include the newer LinkSys (Version 2)
LNE100TX boards.
.It
.Em Winbond 89C840F
-- This chip is a very low-end barely-a-clone of the 21140.  It supports
10Mb/s and 100Mb/s speeds over an MII interface only, and has several
programming differences from the 21140.
.Pp
The receive filter is completely different: it supports only a single
perfect match, and has only a 64-bit multicast filter hash table.  The
receive filter is programmed using special registers rather than the
standard Tulip setup frame.
.Pp
This chip is also plagued by a terrible DMA engine.  The chip must be
run in store-and-forward mode or it will often transmit garbage onto
the wire.
.Pp
Interrupt pacing is also less flexible on the chip.
.Pp
Boards that include the 89C940F include the Complex RL100ATX,
some Unicom 10/100 boards, and several no-name 10/100 boards.
.It
.Em ADMtek AL981
-- This chip is a low cost, single-chip (sans magnetics) 10/100 Ethernet
implementation.  It supports 10Mb/s and 100Mb/s speeds over an internal
PHY.  There is no generic MII bus; instead the IEEE 802.3u-compliant PHY
is accessed via special registers on the chip.  This chip also supports
Wake-On-LAN and IEEE 802.3x flow control.
.Pp
The receive filter on the AL981 is completely different: it supports only
a single perfect match, and has only a 64-bit multicast filter hash table.
The receive filter is programmed using special registers rather than the
standard Tulip setup frame.
.Pp
This chip also supports ACPI power management.
.Pp
A list of boards which include the AL981 is not yet available.
.Pp
Support for the AL981 has not yet been tested.  If you have a board
which uses this chip, please contact the author (listed below).
.It
.Em Xircom X3201-3
-- This chip is a CardBus 21143 clone with a loosely-coupled modem
function (the modem is on a separate CardBus function, but the MAC
portion includes a shadow of its interrupt status).  Media is provided
by an IEEE 802.3u-compliant PHY connected to an MII interface.  These
chips have no SROM; instead, the MAC address must be obtained from the
card's CIS information.  Unlike most other Tulip-like chips, the X3201-3
requires that transmit buffers be aligned to a 4-byte boundary.  This
virtually ensures that each outgoing packet must be copied into an aligned
buffer, since the Ethernet header is 14 bytes long.
.Pp
This chip also supports ACPI power management.
.Pp
This chip is found in Xircom RealPort(tm) 10/100 CardBus Ethernet/Modem
cards, as well as some Intel OEM'd RealPort(tm) cards.
.It
.Em Davicom DM9102 and DM9102A
-- These chips are 21104A-like with a few minor exceptions.  Media is
provided by an internal IEEE 802.3u-compliant PHY accessed as if it
were connected to a normal MII interface.  The DM9102A also provides
an external MII interface, to which a HomePNA 1 PHY is typically
connected.  The DM9102A also includes support for CardBus.
.Pp
This chip also supports ACPI power management and Wake-On-LAN.
.Pp
A complete list of boards with the DM9102 and DM9102A is not available.
However, the DM9102 is often found on PC motherboards that include a
built-in Ethernet interface.
.El
.Sh MEDIA SELECTION
Media selection done using
.Xr ifconfig 8
using the standard
.Xr ifmedia 4
mechanism.  Refer to those manual pages for more information.
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\" XXX too be done.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr eisa 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr mii 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T "DECchip 21040 Ethernet LAN Controller for PCI Hardware Reference Manual"
.%D May 1994
.%A Digital Equipment Corporation
.%O Order Number EC-N0752-72
.Re
.Rs
.%T "DECchip 21041 PCI Ethernet LAN Controller Hardware Reference Manual"
.%N Preliminary
.%D April 1995
.%A Digital Equipment Corporation
.%O Order Number EC-QAWXA-TE
.Re
.Rs
.%T "DECchip 21041 DC1017-BA Errata"
.%N Revision 1.0
.%D April 27, 1995
.%A Digital Equipment Corporation
.%O Order Number EC-QD2MA-TE
.Re
.Rs
.%T "DECchip 21140 PCI Fast Ethernet LAN Controller Hardware Reference Manual"
.%N Supercedes EC-Q0CA-TE
.%D May 1995
.%A Digital Equipment Corporation
.%O Order Number EC-Q0CB-TE
.Re
.Rs
.%T "DECchip 21140A PCI Fast Ethernet LAN Controller Hardware Reference Manual"
.%N Supercedes EC-QN7NA-TE, EC-QN7NB-TE
.%D January 1996
.%A Digital Equipment Corporation
.%O Order Number EC-QN7NC-TE
.Re
.Rs
.%T "21143 PCI/CardBus 10/100Mb/s Ethernet LAN Controller Hardware Reference Manual"
.%N Revision 1.0
.%D October 1998
.%A Intel Corporation
.%O Document Number 278074-001
.Re
.Rs
.%T "Ethernet Address ROM Programming: An Application Note"
.%D April 1994
.%A Digital Equipment Corporation
.%O Order Number EC-N3214-72
.Re
.Rs
.%T "Using the DECchip 21041 with Boot ROM, Serial ROM, and External Register: An Application Note"
.%D April 1995
.%A Digital Equipment Corporation
.%O Order Number EC-QJLGA-TE
.Re
.Rs
.%T "Connecting the DECchip 21140 PCI Fast Ethernet LAN Controller to the Network: An Application Note"
.%N Preliminary
.%D December 1994
.%A Digital Equipment Corporation
.%O Order Number EC-QAR2A-TE
.Re
.Rs
.%T "MXIC MX98713 PMAC 100/10BASE PCI MAC Controller"
.%N Revision 1.1
.%D November 8, 1996
.%A Macronix International Co., Ltd.
.%O Part Number: PM0386
.Re
.Rs
.%T "MXIC MX98713A Fast Ethernet MAC Controller"
.%N Revision 1.0
.%D August 28, 1997
.%A Macronix International Co., Ltd.
.%O Part Number: PM0489
.Re
.Rs
.%T "MXIC MX98715A Single Chip Fast Ethernet NIC Controller"
.%N Revision 1.2
.%D February 24, 1999
.%A Macronix International Co., Ltd.
.%O Part Number: PM0537
.Re
.Rs
.%T "MXIC MX98725 Single Chip Fast Ethernet NIC Controller"
.%N Revision 1.7
.%D September 15, 1998
.%A Macronix International Co., Ltd.
.%O Part Number: PM0468
.Re
.Rs
.%T "MXIC MX98715 Application Note"
.%N Revision 1.5
.%D October 9, 1998
.%A Macronix International Co., Ltd.
.%O Part Number: PM0498
.Re
.Rs
.%T "MXIC MX98715A Application Note"
.%N Revision 1.2
.%D October 9, 1998
.%A Macronix International Co., Ltd.
.%O Part Number: PM0541
.Re
.Rs
.%T "MXIC MX98725 Application Note"
.%N Revision 1.1
.%D July 10, 1998
.%A Macronix International Co., Ltd.
.%O Part Number: PM0525
.Re
.Rs
.%T "MXIC LC82C115 Single Chip Fast Ethernet NIC Controller"
.%N Revision 0.2
.%D February 12, 1999
.%A Macronix International Co., Ltd.
.%O Part Number: PM0572
.Re
.Rs
.%T "PNIC Hardware Specification"
.%N Revision 1.0
.%D December 1, 1994
.%A LITE ON, Inc.
.Re
.Rs
.%T "Comet: AL981 PCI 10/100 Fast Ethernet Controller with Integrated PHY"
.%N Revision 0.93
.%D January, 1999
.%A ADMtek Incorporated
.Re
.Rs
.%T "Winbond LAN W89C840F 100/10Mbps Ethernet Controller"
.%N Revision A1
.%D April 1997
.%A Winbond Electronics Corporation
.Re
.Rs
.%T "Xircom X3201-3 CardBus 10/100 Mbps Ethernet Controller Software Developer's Specification"
.%N Revision B
.%D April 7, 1999
.%O Reference number: 103-0548-001
.Re
.Rs
.%T "Davicom DM9102 10/100 Mbps Single Chip LAN Controller"
.%N Version DM9102-DS-F01
.%D July 22, 1999
.Re
.Rs
.%T "Davicom DM9102A Single Chip Fast Ethernet NIC Controller"
.%N Version DM9102A-DS-F01
.%D January 20, 2000
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jason R. Thorpe
while employed at the Numerical Aerospace Simulation Facility,
NASA Ames Research Center.
The author may be contacted at
.Aq thorpej@NetBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver does not match the DECchip 21040, 21041, 21140, 21142, and 21143
chips on the PCI bus by default.  That is because another driver,
.Nm de ,
which is more functional in some circumstances, exists for them.  In
order for support for these chips to be activated in
.Nm tlp ,
either
.Nm de
must be left out of the kernel, or the appropriate
.Pa TLP_MATCH_*
options must be used.
.Pp
Media autosense is not yet supported for any serial or PCS function media.
It is, however, supported for IEEE 802.3u-compliant PHY media.
