.\"	$NetBSD: tsllux.4,v 1.2.2.2 2018/06/25 07:25:36 pgoyette Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Jason R Thorpe
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd May 21, 2018
.Dt TSLLUX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tsllux
.Nd Taos TSL256x Light-to-Digital Coverter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "tsllux* at iic? addr 0x29 flags 0x0"
.Cd "tsllux* at iic? addr 0x39 flags 0x0"
.Cd "tsllux* at iic? addr 0x49 flags 0x0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn Taos
TSL2560 and TSL2561 light-to-digital converter
.Pq ambient light sensor
with the
.Xr envsys 4
API.
.Pp
The TSL2560 is designed to work with SMBus at 100 kHz.
The TSL2561 is designed to work with I2C Fast-Mode at 400 kHz.
The sensors come in a variety of packages, including 6-lead Chipscale
.Pq CS ,
6-lead TMB
.Pq T ,
dual flat no-lead
.Pq FN ,
and 6-lead ChipLED
.Pq CL .
The
.Sq CS
package requires a different set of coefficients for calculating
the Lux value from the raw sensor data.
This behavior is enabled by specifying the flag
.Dv 0x1
in the kernel configuration file or by using a
.Xr sysctl 8
variable; see below.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver exports some
.Xr sysctl 8
variables to control the behavior of the sensor and driver:
.Bl -tag -width "XX"
.It hw.tsllux0.cs_package Pq boolean, read-write
This variable indicates if the driver instance has been configured
to use the coeffecients appropriate for the
.Sq CS
package variant.
.It hw.tsllux0.auto_gain Pq boolean, read-write
This variable indicates if the driver has been configured to use
an auto-gain algorithm to improve sensitivity of the sensor while
taking care to avoid sensor saturation.
Auto-gain is disabled by default.
.It hw.tsllux0.gain Pq integer, read-write
This variable indicates the selected sensor gain.
If auto-gain is enabled, this will reflect the current gain setting
selected by the auto-gain algorithm.
Otherwise, it reflects the previously-configured gain.
Valid values are
.Dv 1
and
.Dv 16 .
The default gain is
.Dv 1 .
Writing to this variable implicitly disables auto-gain.
.It hw.tsllux0.integration_time Pq integer, read-write
This variable indicates the selected analog-to-digital converter
integration time.
Longer integration times correspond to more accurate readings, at the
cost of more costly read operation.
Valid values are
.Dv 13 Pq 13.7ms ,
.Dv 101 Pq 101ms ,
and
.Dv 402 Pq 402ms .
The default value is
.Dv 101 .
Note that that due to the granularity of sleep timing in the kernel,
the
.Nm
driver will busy-wait for wait times less than 1 Hz, and add an additional
sleep clock tick for wait times greater than 1 Hz.
See
.Xr hz 9 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr envsys 4 ,
.Xr iic 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 9.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jason R Thorpe Aq Mt thorpej@NetBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The driver does not currently support the sensor's interrupt features
or the sensor's manual integration timing feature.
