.\" $NetBSD: uax.4,v 1.1 2003/02/16 14:10:39 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd February 16, 2003
.Dt UAX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uax
.Nd ASIX AX88172 USB Ethernet driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "uax*   at uhub?"
.Cd "XXphy* at mii?"
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Dv -offset indent -compact
.It Tn D-Link DUB-E100
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB (2.0)
.Tn Ethernet
adapters based on the ASIX AX88172 chip.
.Pp
The chip contains a 10/100
.Tn Ethernet
MAC with MII interface and is designed to work with both
.Tn Ethernet
and HomePNA transceivers.
The chip support USB 2.0 so it can handle 100 Mb/s data.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It autoselect
Enable automatic selection of the media type and options.
.It 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.  The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to enable
.Ar full-duplex
operation.  Not specifying
.Ar full duplex
implies
.Ar half-duplex
mode.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (fast
.Tn Ethernet )
operation.  The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to enable
.Ar full-duplex
operation.  Not specifying
.Ar full duplex
implies
.Ar half-duplex
mode.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.  The interface will operate in half duplex mode
if this media option is not specified.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T ASIX AX88172 data sheet
.%O http://www.asix.com.tw
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Nx 2.0 .
