.\" $NetBSD: ugen.4,v 1.31 2012/11/27 20:06:36 jkunz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 23, 2009
.Dt UGEN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ugen
.Nd USB generic device support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ugen* at uhub? flags N"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for all USB devices that do not have
a special driver.
It supports access to all parts of the device,
but not in a way that is as convenient as a special purpose driver.
.Pp
Normally the
.Nm
driver is used when no other driver attaches to a device.
If
.Dq flags 1
is specified, the
.Nm
will instead attach with a very high priority and always be used.
Together with the
.Cd vendor
and
.Cd product
locators this can be used to force the
.Nm
driver to be used for a certain
device.
.Pp
There can be up to 127 USB devices connected to a USB bus.
Each USB device can have up to 16 endpoints.
Each of these endpoints will communicate in one of four different
modes: control, isochronous, bulk, or interrupt.
Each of the endpoints will have a different device node.
The four least significant bits in the minor device
number determines which endpoint the device accesses and the rest
of the bits determines which USB device.
.Pp
If an endpoint address is used both for input and output the device
can be opened for both read or write.
.Pp
To find out what endpoints exist there are a series of
.Xr ioctl 2
operations on the control endpoint that return the USB descriptors
of the device, configurations, interfaces, and endpoints.
.Pp
The control transfer mode can only happen on the control endpoint
which is always endpoint 0.
The control endpoint accepts requests
and may respond with an answer to such requests.
Control requests are issued by
.Xr ioctl 2
calls.
.\" .Pp
.\" The isochronous transfer mode can be in or out depending on the
.\" endpoint.
.\" To perform IO on an isochronous endpoint
.\" .Xr read 2
.\" and
.\" .Xr write 2
.\" should be used.
.\" Before any IO operations can take place the transfer rate in
.\" bytes/second has to be set.
.\" This is done with
.\" .Xr ioctl 2
.\" .Dv USB_SET_ISO_RATE .
.\" Performing this call sets up a buffer corresponding to
.\" about 1 second of data.
.Pp
The bulk transfer mode can be in or out depending on the
endpoint.
To perform IO on a bulk endpoint
.Xr read 2
and
.Xr write 2
should be used.
All IO operations on a bulk endpoint are normally unbuffered.
The
.Dv USB_SET_BULK_RA
and
.Dv USB_SET_BULK_WB
.Xr ioctl 2
calls enable read-ahead and write-behind buffering, respectively.
This buffering supports fixed-sized USB transfers and is intended for
devices with regular and continuing data transfers.
When read-ahead or write-behind are enabled, the file descriptor
may be set to use non-blocking IO.
.Pp
When in a read-ahead/writeback mode,
.Xr select 2
for read and write operates normally, returning true if there is data
in the read buffer and space in the write buffer, respectively.
When not,
.Xr select 2
always returns true, because there is no way to predict how the device
will respond to a read or write request.
.Pp
The interrupt transfer mode can be in or out depending on the
endpoint.
To perform IO on an interrupt endpoint
.Xr read 2
and
.Xr write 2
should be used.
A moderate amount of buffering is done
by the driver.
.Pp
All endpoints handle the following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent -compact
.It Dv USB_SET_SHORT_XFER (int)
Allow short read transfer.
Normally a transfer from the device which is shorter than the
request specified is reported as an error.
.It Dv USB_SET_TIMEOUT (int)
Set the timeout on the device operations, the time is specified
in milliseconds.
The value 0 is used to indicate that there is no timeout.
.El
.Pp
The control endpoint (endpoint 0) handles the following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent -compact
.It Dv USB_GET_CONFIG (int)
Get the device configuration number.
.It Dv USB_SET_CONFIG (int)
Set the device into the given configuration number.
.Pp
This operation can only be performed when the control endpoint
is the sole open endpoint.
.It Dv USB_GET_ALTINTERFACE (struct usb_alt_interface)
Get the alternative setting number for the interface with the given
index.
The
.Dv config_index
is ignored in this call.
.Bd -literal
struct usb_alt_interface {
	int	uai_config_index;
	int	uai_interface_index;
	int	uai_alt_no;
};
.Ed
.It Dv USB_SET_ALTINTERFACE (struct usb_alt_interface)
Set the alternative setting to the given number in the interface with the
given index.
The
.Dv uai_config_index
is ignored in this call.
.Pp
This operation can only be performed when no endpoints for the interface
are open.
.It Dv USB_GET_NO_ALT (struct usb_alt_interface)
Return the number of different alternate settings in the
.Dv uai_alt_no
field.
.It Dv USB_GET_DEVICE_DESC (usb_device_descriptor_t)
Return the device descriptor.
.It Dv USB_GET_CONFIG_DESC (struct usb_config_desc)
Return the descriptor for the configuration with the given index.
For convenience the current configuration can be specified by
.Dv USB_CURRENT_CONFIG_INDEX .
.Bd -literal
struct usb_config_desc {
	int	ucd_config_index;
	usb_config_descriptor_t ucd_desc;
};
.Ed
.It Dv USB_GET_INTERFACE_DESC (struct usb_interface_desc)
Return the interface descriptor for an interface specified by its
configuration index, interface index, and alternative index.
For convenience the current alternative can be specified by
.Dv USB_CURRENT_ALT_INDEX .
.Bd -literal
struct usb_interface_desc {
	int	uid_config_index;
	int	uid_interface_index;
	int	uid_alt_index;
	usb_interface_descriptor_t uid_desc;
};
.Ed
.It Dv USB_GET_ENDPOINT_DESC (struct usb_endpoint_desc)
Return the endpoint descriptor for the endpoint specified by its
configuration index, interface index, alternative index, and
endpoint index.
.Bd -literal
struct usb_endpoint_desc {
	int	ued_config_index;
	int	ued_interface_index;
	int	ued_alt_index;
	int	ued_endpoint_index;
	usb_endpoint_descriptor_t ued_desc;
};
.Ed
.It Dv USB_GET_FULL_DESC (struct usb_full_desc)
Return all the descriptors for the given configuration.
.Bd -literal
struct usb_full_desc {
	int	ufd_config_index;
	u_int	ufd_size;
	u_char	*ufd_data;
};
.Ed
The
.Dv ufd_data
field should point to a memory area of the size given in the
.Dv ufd_size
field.
The proper size can be determined by first issuing a
.Dv USB_GET_CONFIG_DESC
and inspecting the
.Dv wTotalLength
field.
.It Dv USB_GET_STRING_DESC (struct usb_string_desc)
Get a string descriptor for the given language id and
string index.
.Bd -literal
struct usb_string_desc {
	int	usd_string_index;
	int	usd_language_id;
	usb_string_descriptor_t usd_desc;
};
.Ed
.It Dv USB_DO_REQUEST
Send a USB request to the device on the control endpoint.
Any data sent to/from the device is located at
.Dv data .
The size of the transferred data is determined from the
.Dv request .
The
.Dv ucr_addr
field is ignored in this call.
The
.Dv ucr_flags
field can be used to flag that the request is allowed to
be shorter than the requested size, and the
.Dv ucr_actlen
field will contain the actual size on completion.
.Bd -literal
struct usb_ctl_request {
	int	ucr_addr;
	usb_device_request_t ucr_request;
	void	*ucr_data;
	int	ucr_flags;
#define USBD_SHORT_XFER_OK	0x04	/* allow short reads */
	int	ucr_actlen;		/* actual length transferred */
};
.Ed
This is a dangerous operation in that it can perform arbitrary operations
on the device.
Some of the most dangerous (e.g., changing the device
address) are not allowed.
.It Dv USB_GET_DEVICEINFO (struct usb_device_info)
Get an information summary for the device.
This call will not issue any USB transactions.
.El
.Pp
Bulk endpoints handle the following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent -compact
.It Dv USB_SET_BULK_RA (int)
Enable or disable bulk read-ahead.
When enabled, the driver will begin to read data from the device into
a buffer, and will perform reads from the device whenever there is
room in the buffer.
The
.Xr read 2
call will read data from this buffer, blocking if necessary until
there is enough data to read the length of data requested.
The buffer size and the read request length can be set by the
.Dv USB_SET_BULK_RA_OPT
.Xr ioctl 2
call.
.It Dv USB_SET_BULK_WB (int)
Enable or disable bulk write-behind.
When enabled, the driver will buffer data from the
.Xr write 2
call before writing it to the device, enabling the
.Xr write 2
call to return immediately.
.Xr write 2
will block if there is not enough room in the buffer for all
the data.
The buffer size and the write request length can be set by the
.Dv USB_SET_BULK_WB_OPT
.Xr ioctl 2
call.
.It Dv USB_SET_BULK_RA_OPT (struct usb_bulk_ra_wb_opt)
Set the size of the buffer and the length of the read requests used by
the driver when bulk read-ahead is enabled.
The changes do not take
effect until the next time bulk read-ahead is enabled.
Read requests
are made for the length specified, and the host controller driver
(i.e.,
.Xr ehci 4 ,
.Xr ohci 4 ,
and
.Xr uhci 4 )
will perform as many bus transfers as required.
If transfers from the device should be smaller than the maximum length,
.Dv ra_wb_request_size
must be set to the required length.
.Bd -literal
struct usb_bulk_ra_wb_opt {
	u_int	ra_wb_buffer_size;
	u_int	ra_wb_request_size;
};
.Ed
.It Dv USB_SET_BULK_WB_OPT (struct usb_bulk_ra_wb_opt)
Set the size of the buffer and the length of the write requests used
by the driver when bulk write-behind is enabled.
The changes do not
take effect until the next time bulk write-behind is enabled.
.El
.Pp
Note that there are two different ways of addressing configurations, interfaces,
alternatives, and endpoints: by index or by number.
The index is the ordinal number (starting from 0) of the descriptor
as presented by the device.
The number is the respective number of
the entity as found in its descriptor.
Enumeration of descriptors
use the index, getting and setting typically uses numbers.
.Pp
Example:
All endpoints (except the control endpoint) for the current configuration
can be found by iterating the
.Dv interface_index
from 0 to
.Dv config_desc-\*[Gt]bNumInterface-1
and for each of these iterating the
.Dv endpoint_index
from 0 to
.Dv interface_desc-\*[Gt]bNumEndpoints .
The
.Dv config_index
should set to
.Dv USB_CURRENT_CONFIG_INDEX
and
.Dv alt_index
should be set to
.Dv USB_CURRENT_ALT_INDEX .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /dev/ugenN.EE
Endpoint
.Pa EE
of device
.Pa N .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr usb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver
appeared in
.Nx 1.4 .
.\" .Sh BUGS
.\" The driver is not yet finished; there is no access to isochronous endpoints.
