.\" $NetBSD: viornd.4,v 1.2.2.3 2014/11/02 10:15:12 martin Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Thor Lancelot Simon.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 26, 2014
.Dt VIORND 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm viornd
.Nd VirtIO entropy source
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "viornd* at virtio?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
When the system has entropy demand,
the
.Nm
driver, used with a compatible hypervisor such as QEMU, KVM, or Google
Compute Engine, requests entropy using the VirtIO random number interface
and feeds it into the system entropy pool.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rnd 4 ,
.Xr virtio 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Ox 5.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Stephan Fritsch Aq Mt sf@fritsch.de
and reworked to request entropy upon demand by
.An Thor Lancelot Simon Aq Mt tls@NetBSD.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
VirtIO appears to support at least 8 pending entropy requests, but
.Nm
currently supports only one pending request at a time.
