.\"	$NetBSD: wbsio.4,v 1.8 2017/12/13 12:12:35 wiz Exp $
.\"	$OpenBSD: wbsio.4,v 1.2 2008/02/17 16:48:47 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Mark Kettenis <kettenis@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd December 12, 2017
.Dt WBSIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wbsio
.Nd Winbond (Nuvoton) LPC Super I/O
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "wbsio* at isa? port 0x2e"
.Cd "wbsio* at isa? port 0x4e"
.Cd "lm* at wbsio?"
.Cd "gpio* at gpiobus?"
.Pp
.Cd "options WBSIO_GPIO"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Winbond (was spun off as Nuvoton)
LPC Super I/O ICs.
The hardware monitoring function and GPIO are currently supported.
.Pp
Support for the hardware monitor function is provided through the
.Xr lm 4
driver.
The GPIO function supports 64 pins for NCT6795D.
Access to the pins provided by the
.Xr gpio 4
interface.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gpio 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr isa 4 ,
.Xr lm 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 4.3 .
.Nx
support was added in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Mark Kettenis Aq Mt kettenis@openbsd.org .
It was adapted to
.Nx
by
.An Constantine A. Murenin Aq Mt cnst@NetBSD.org .
