.\"	$NetBSD: wd.4,v 1.15 2009/05/27 19:24:00 snj Exp $
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994 James A. Jegers
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 30, 2004
.Dt WD 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wd
.Nd WD100x compatible hard disk driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "wd* at atabus? drive ? flags 0x0000"
.Cd "wd* at umass?"
.Cd options WD_SOFTBADSECT
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm wd
driver supports hard disks that emulate the Western
Digital WD100x.
This includes standard MFM, RLL, ESDI, IDE, and EIDE drives.
.Pp
The flags are used only with controllers that support DMA operations and
mode settings (like some pciide controllers).
The lowest order nibble (rightmost digit) of the flags defines the PIO mode,
the next four bits define the DMA mode and the third nibble defines the
UltraDMA mode.
For each set of four bits, the 3 lower bits define the mode to use
and the last bit must be set to 1 for this setting to be used.
For DMA and UDMA, 0xf (1111) means 'disable'.
For example, a flags value of 0x0fac (1111 1010 1100)
means 'use PIO mode 4, DMA mode 2, disable UltraDMA'.
0x0000 means "use whatever the drive claims to support."
.Pp
The kernel configuration option
.Dq Cd options WD_SOFTBADSECT
enables a software managed bad-sector list which will prevent further accesses
to sectors where an unrecoverable read error occurred.
A user interface is provided by
.Xr dkctl 8 .
Unlike the (historical) mechanisms provided by
.Xr bad144 8
and
.Xr badsect 8
the software list does neither support sector replacement nor is it saved
across reboots.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ata 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pciide 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr umass 4 ,
.Xr wdc 4 ,
.Xr atactl 8 ,
.Xr dkctl 8
.Sh BUGS
The optional software bad sector list does not interoperate well with
sector remapping features of modern disks.
To let the disk remap a sector internally, the software bad sector list
must be flushed or disabled before.
