.\"     $NetBSD: xip.4,v 1.1.2.1 2010/11/05 08:55:26 uebayasi Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 4, 2010
.Dt XIP 4
.Os
.
.Sh NAME
.Nm XIP
.Nd eXecute-In-Place
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd options XIP
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
option enables a functionality for the kernel to execute programs
directly from memory-addressable device pages.
Normally the kernel allocates memory pages (page cache) and copies
file contents onto them, because most filesystem storage devices
are accessed by I/O.
There are devices whole data can be memory-mapped.
.Pp
By using
.Nm ,
the kernel maps those file contents directly into user process's
address space.
This brings us to save memory used for page caches, and shorten
program load time compared to slow I/O storage devices.
.Pp
Needless to say, not all block devices can be capable of XIP.
Only memory-mappable block devices, i.e., NOR FlashROM, and RAM
based memory disk.
To support XIP, block device drivers need to allocate a VM device
physical segment beforehand, and return it at the request of
DIOCGPHYSSEG ioctl, called from VFS.
VM device physical segment is allocated by calling the
.Xr bus_space_physload_device
function in
.Xr bus_space 9
API.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr flash 4 ,
.Xr xmd 4 ,
.Xr mount 8 ,
.Xr bus_space 9 ,
.Xr disk 9 ,
.Xr uvm 9
.
.Sh CAVEATS
.Pp
Don't confuse memory-mappable NOR FlashROM and FlashROM based
storage device.  To access the latter, CPU uses I/O instead of
MMIO.
.
.Sh HISTORY
.Pp
.Nm
first appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
support was added by Masao Uebayashi.
.
.Sh BUGS
.Pp
Write operation is not supported.
