.\"	$NetBSD: zstty.4,v 1.8.14.1 2007/06/03 17:26:00 wrstuden Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Gordon W. Ross.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd May 12, 2007
.Dt ZSTTY 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm zstty ,
.Nm zsc ,
.Nm zs
.Nd
.Tn Zilog
8530 serial communications interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ss alpha ( DEC 3000 )
.Cd "zsc0	at ioasic? offset 0x100000"
.Cd "zsc1	at ioasic? offset 0x180000"
.Cd "zstty0	at zsc0 channel ?	# serial ports on B channels"
.Cd "zstty2	at zsc1 channel ?	# serial ports on B channels"
.Cd "lkkbd0	at zsc1 channel ?	# keyboard port on A channels"
.Cd "vsms0	at zsc0 channel ?	# mouse port on A channels"
.Ss cesfic
.Cd "zsc*	at mainbus0"
.Cd "zstty*	at zsc? channel ?"
.Ss mac68k and macppc
.Cd "zsc0	at obio?"
.Cd "zstty*	at zsc? channel ?"
.Ss mipsco
.Cd "zsc0	at obio0 addr 0xbb000000"
.Cd "zstty0	at zsc0 channel 0"
.Cd "zstty1	at zsc0 channel 1"
.Ss mvme68k
.Cd "zsc*	at pcc? ipl 4"
.Cd "zsc*	at pcctwo? ipl 4"
.Cd "zstty*	at zsc? channel ?"
.Ss news68k
.Cd "zsc0	at hb0 addr 0xe0d40000 ipl 5 vect 64 flags 0x0	# news1700"
.Cd "zsc0	at hb1 addr 0xe1780000 ipl 5 vect 64 flags 0x1	# news1200"
.Cd "zstty0	at zsc0 channel 0"
.Cd "zstty1	at zsc0 channel 1"
.Ss newsmips
.Cd "zsc0	at hb0 addr 0xbfec0000 level 1 flags 0x0	# on-board"
.Cd "zsc1	at hb0 addr 0xb8c40100 level 1 flags 0x1	# expansion board"
.Cd "zsc2	at hb0 addr 0xb8c40104 level 1 flags 0x1"
.Cd "zsc0	at ap?"
.Cd "zstty0	at zsc0 channel 0"
.Cd "zstty1	at zsc0 channel 1"
.Cd "zstty2	at zsc1 channel 0"
.Cd "zstty3	at zsc1 channel 1"
.Cd "zstty4	at zsc2 channel 0"
.Cd "zstty5	at zsc2 channel 1"
.Ss next68k
.Cd "zsc0	at intio? ipl 5"
.Cd "#zsc1	at intio? ipl 5"
.Cd "zstty0	at zsc0 channel 0	# ttya"
.Cd "zstty1	at zsc0 channel 1	# ttyb"
.Ss sgimips
.Cd "zsc* 	at hpc0 offset ?"
.Cd "zstty*	at zsc? channel ?"
.Ss sparc
.Cd "zs0	at mainbus0				# sun4c"
.Cd "zs0	at obio0				# sun4m"
.Cd "zs0	at obio0 addr 0xf1000000 level 12	# sun4/200 and sun4/300"
.Cd "zs0	at obio0 addr 0x01000000 level 12	# sun4/100"
.Cd "zstty0	at zs0 channel 0			# ttya"
.Cd "zstty1	at zs0 channel 1			# ttyb"
.Cd "zs1	at mainbus0				# sun4c"
.Cd "zs1	at obio0				# sun4m"
.Cd "zs1	at obio0 addr 0xf0000000 level 12	# sun4/200 and sun4/300"
.Cd "zs1	at obio0 addr 0x00000000 level 12	# sun4/100"
.Cd "kbd0	at zs1 channel 0			# keyboard"
.Cd "ms0	at zs1 channel 1			# mouse"
.Cd "zs2	at obio0 addr 0xe0000000 level 12	# sun4/300"
.Cd "zstty2	at zs2 channel 0			# ttyc"
.Cd "zstty3	at zs2 channel 1			# ttyd"
.Ss sun2
.Cd "zs0	at obio0 addr 0x002000	# 2/120, 2/170"
.Cd "zs1	at obmem0 addr 0x780000	# 2/120, 2/170"
.Cd "zs0	at obio0 addr 0x7f2000	# 2/50"
.Cd "zs1	at obio0 addr 0x7f1800	# 2/50"
.Cd "zs2	at mbmem0 addr 0x080800	# 2/120, 2/170 (first sc SCSI)"
.Cd "zs3	at mbmem0 addr 0x081000	# 2/120, 2/170 (first sc SCSI)"
.Cd "zs4	at mbmem0 addr 0x084800	# 2/120, 2/170 (second sc SCSI)"
.Cd "zs5	at mbmem0 addr 0x085000	# 2/120, 2/170 (second sc SCSI)"
.Cd "zstty*	at zs? channel ?	# ttya"
.Cd "kbd0	at zstty?		# keyboard"
.Cd "ms0	at zstty?		# mouse"
.Ss sun3
.Cd "zstty0	at zsc1 channel 0	# ttya"
.Cd "zstty1	at zsc1 channel 1	# ttyb"
.Cd "kbd0	at zsc0 channel 0	# keyboard"
.Cd "ms0	at zsc0 channel 1	# mouse"
.Ss x68k
.Cd "zsc0	at intio0 addr 0xe98000 intr 112"
.Cd "zstty0	at zsc0 channel 0		# built-in RS-232C"
.Cd "ms0	at zsc0 channel 1		# standard mouse"
.Cd "#zsc1	at intio0 addr 0xeafc00 intr 113"
.Cd "#zstty2	at zsc1 channel 0"
.Cd "#zstty3	at zsc1 channel 1"
.Cd "#zsc2	at intio0 addr 0xeafc10 intr 114"
.Cd "#zstty4	at zsc2 channel 0"
.Cd "#zstty5	at zsc2 channel 1"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides
.Tn TTY
support for
.Tn Zilog
8530 Dual
.Tn UART
chips.
.Pp
Input and output for each line may set to any baud rate in the
range 50 to 38400 (and higher on some machines).
.Sh FILES
.Ss alpha
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /dev/ttyB0
.It Pa /dev/ttyB1
.El
.Ss others
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /dev/ttya
.It Pa /dev/ttyb
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It zs0*: fifo overflow
.br
The on-chip
.Dq FIFO
has overflowed and incoming data has been lost.
This generally means the machine is not responding to
interrupts from the ZS chip fast enough, which can be
remedied only by using a lower baud rate.
.It zs0*: ring overflow
.br
The software input
.Qq ring
has overflowed.
This usually means input flow-control is not configured correctly
.Pq i.e. incorrect cable wiring .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kbd 4 ,
.Xr ms 4 ,
.Xr scc 4 ,
.Xr tty 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was derived from the
.Nm sparc
.Nm zs
driver supplied with
.Bx 4.4
.Ux .
.Sh CAVEATS
.Pa /dev/ttyB1
on alpha is created by
.Xr MAKEDEV 8
with minor number 2, so the corresponding device should be zstty2, not zstty1.
.Sh BUGS
The old
.Tn Zilog
8530 chip has a very small FIFO (3 bytes?) and
therefore has very strict latency requirements for the
interrupt service routine.
This limits the usable baud rates on many machines.
