\input texinfo  @c                                  -*- Texinfo -*-
@setfilename bzip2.info

@ignore
$NetBSD: manual.texi,v 1.4 1999/07/03 12:30:17 simonb Exp $

This file documents bzip2 version 0.9.0, and associated library
libbzip2, written by Julian Seward (jseward@acm.org).

Copyright (C) 1996-1998 Julian R Seward

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for verbatim copies.
@end ignore

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Bzip2: (bzip2).		A program and library for data compression.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format

@end ifinfo

@iftex
@c @finalout
@settitle bzip2 and libbzip2
@titlepage
@title bzip2 and libbzip2
@subtitle a program and library for data compression
@subtitle copyright (C) 1996-1998 Julian Seward
@subtitle version 0.9.0 of 23 August 1998
@author Julian Seward

@end titlepage
@end iftex


@parindent 0mm
@parskip 2mm


This program, @code{bzip2}, 
and associated library @code{libbzip2}, are
Copyright (C) 1996-1998 Julian R Seward.  All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:
@itemize @bullet
@item
   Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@item
   The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must 
   not claim that you wrote the original software.  If you use this 
   software in a product, an acknowledgment in the product 
   documentation would be appreciated but is not required.
@item
   Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must
   not be misrepresented as being the original software.
@item
   The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote 
   products derived from this software without specific prior written 
   permission.
@end itemize
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY
DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE
GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Julian Seward, Guildford, Surrey, UK.

@code{jseward@@acm.org}

@code{http://www.muraroa.demon.co.uk}

@code{bzip2}/@code{libbzip2} version 0.9.0 of 23 August 1998.

PATENTS: To the best of my knowledge, @code{bzip2} does not use any patented
algorithms.  However, I do not have the resources available to carry out
a full patent search.  Therefore I cannot give any guarantee of the
above statement.







@node Overview, Implementation, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

@code{bzip2}  compresses  files  using the Burrows-Wheeler 
block-sorting text compression algorithm,  and  Huffman  coding.
Compression  is  generally  considerably  better than that
achieved by more conventional LZ77/LZ78-based compressors,
and  approaches  the performance of the PPM family of statistical compressors.

@code{bzip2} is built on top of @code{libbzip2}, a flexible library
for handling compressed data in the @code{bzip2} format.  This manual
describes both how to use the program and 
how to work with the library interface.  Most of the
manual is devoted to this library, not the program, 
which is good news if your interest is only in the program.

Chapter 2 describes how to use @code{bzip2}; this is the only part 
you need to read if you just want to know how to operate the program.
Chapter 3 describes the programming interfaces in detail, and
Chapter 4 records some miscellaneous notes which I thought
ought to be recorded somewhere.


@chapter How to use @code{bzip2}

This chapter contains a copy of the @code{bzip2} man page,
and nothing else.
@example
NAME
       bzip2, bunzip2 - a block-sorting file compressor, v0.9.0
       bzcat - decompresses files to stdout
       bzip2recover - recovers data from damaged bzip2 files


SYNOPSIS
       bzip2 [ -cdfkstvzVL123456789 ] [ filenames ...  ]
       bunzip2 [ -fkvsVL ] [ filenames ...  ]
       bzcat [ -s ] [ filenames ...  ]
       bzip2recover filename


DESCRIPTION
       bzip2  compresses  files  using the Burrows-Wheeler block-
       sorting text compression algorithm,  and  Huffman  coding.
       Compression  is  generally  considerably  better than that
       achieved by more conventional LZ77/LZ78-based compressors,
       and  approaches  the performance of the PPM family of sta-
       tistical compressors.

       The command-line options are deliberately very similar  to
       those of GNU Gzip, but they are not identical.

       bzip2  expects  a list of file names to accompany the com-
       mand-line flags.  Each file is replaced  by  a  compressed
       version  of  itself,  with  the  name "original_name.bz2".
       Each compressed file has the same  modification  date  and
       permissions  as  the corresponding original, so that these
       properties can  be  correctly  restored  at  decompression
       time.  File name handling is naive in the sense that there
       is no mechanism for preserving original file  names,  per-
       missions  and  dates  in filesystems which lack these con-
       cepts, or have serious file name length restrictions, such
       as MS-DOS.

       bzip2  and  bunzip2 will by default not overwrite existing
       files; if you want this to happen, specify the -f flag.

       If no file names  are  specified,  bzip2  compresses  from
       standard  input  to  standard output.  In this case, bzip2
       will decline to write compressed output to a terminal,  as
       this  would  be  entirely  incomprehensible  and therefore
       pointless.

       bunzip2 (or bzip2 -d ) decompresses and restores all spec-
       ified files whose names end in ".bz2".  Files without this
       suffix are ignored.  Again, supplying no filenames  causes
       decompression from standard input to standard output.

       bunzip2 will correctly decompress a file which is the con-
       catenation of two or more compressed files.  The result is
       the concatenation of the corresponding uncompressed files.
       Integrity testing (-t) of concatenated compressed files is
       also supported.

       You  can also compress or decompress files to the standard
       output by giving the -c flag.  Multiple files may be  com-
       pressed and decompressed like this.  The resulting outputs
       are fed sequentially to stdout.  Compression  of  multiple
       files  in this manner generates a stream containing multi-
       ple compressed file representations.  Such a stream can be
       decompressed  correctly  only  by  bzip2  version 0.9.0 or
       later.  Earlier versions of bzip2 will stop  after  decom-
       pressing the first file in the stream.

       bzcat  (or bzip2 -dc ) decompresses all specified files to
       the standard output.

       Compression is always performed, even  if  the  compressed
       file  is slightly larger than the original.  Files of less
       than about one hundred bytes tend to get larger, since the
       compression  mechanism  has  a  constant  overhead  in the
       region of 50 bytes.  Random data (including the output  of
       most  file  compressors)  is  coded at about 8.05 bits per
       byte, giving an expansion of around 0.5%.

       As a self-check for your  protection,  bzip2  uses  32-bit
       CRCs  to make sure that the decompressed version of a file
       is identical to the original.  This guards against corrup-
       tion  of  the compressed data, and against undetected bugs
       in bzip2 (hopefully very unlikely).  The chances  of  data
       corruption  going  undetected  is  microscopic,  about one
       chance in four billion for each file processed.  Be aware,
       though,  that  the  check occurs upon decompression, so it
       can only tell you that that something is wrong.  It  can't
       help  you recover the original uncompressed data.  You can
       use bzip2recover to  try  to  recover  data  from  damaged
       files.

       Return  values:  0  for a normal exit, 1 for environmental
       problems (file not found, invalid flags, I/O errors,  &c),
       2 to indicate a corrupt compressed file, 3 for an internal
       consistency error (eg, bug) which caused bzip2 to panic.


MEMORY MANAGEMENT
       Bzip2 compresses large files in blocks.   The  block  size
       affects  both  the  compression  ratio  achieved,  and the
       amount of memory needed both for  compression  and  decom-
       pression.   The flags -1 through -9 specify the block size
       to be 100,000 bytes through 900,000  bytes  (the  default)
       respectively.   At decompression-time, the block size used
       for compression is read from the header of the  compressed
       file, and bunzip2 then allocates itself just enough memory
       to decompress the file.  Since block sizes are  stored  in
       compressed  files,  it follows that the flags -1 to -9 are
       irrelevant  to  and  so  ignored   during   decompression.

       Compression  and decompression requirements, in bytes, can
       be estimated as:

             Compression:   400k + ( 7 x block size )

             Decompression: 100k + ( 4 x block size ), or
                            100k + ( 2.5 x block size )

       Larger  block  sizes  give  rapidly  diminishing  marginal
       returns;  most of the compression comes from the first two
       or three hundred k of block size, a fact worth bearing  in
       mind  when  using  bzip2  on  small  machines.  It is also
       important to  appreciate  that  the  decompression  memory
       requirement  is  set  at compression-time by the choice of
       block size.

       For files compressed with the  default  900k  block  size,
       bunzip2  will require about 3700 kbytes to decompress.  To
       support decompression of any file on a 4 megabyte machine,
       bunzip2  has  an  option to decompress using approximately
       half this amount of memory, about 2300 kbytes.  Decompres-
       sion  speed  is also halved, so you should use this option
       only where necessary.  The relevant flag is -s.

       In general, try and use the largest block size memory con-
       straints  allow,  since  that  maximises  the  compression
       achieved.  Compression and decompression speed are  virtu-
       ally unaffected by block size.

       Another  significant point applies to files which fit in a
       single block -- that  means  most  files  you'd  encounter
       using  a  large  block  size.   The  amount of real memory
       touched is proportional to the size of the file, since the
       file  is smaller than a block.  For example, compressing a
       file 20,000 bytes long with the flag  -9  will  cause  the
       compressor  to  allocate  around 6700k of memory, but only
       touch 400k + 20000 * 7 = 540 kbytes of it.  Similarly, the
       decompressor  will  allocate  3700k  but only touch 100k +
       20000 * 4 = 180 kbytes.

       Here is a table which summarises the maximum memory  usage
       for  different  block  sizes.   Also recorded is the total
       compressed size for 14 files of the Calgary Text  Compres-
       sion  Corpus totalling 3,141,622 bytes.  This column gives
       some feel for how  compression  varies  with  block  size.
       These  figures  tend to understate the advantage of larger
       block sizes for larger files, since the  Corpus  is  domi-
       nated by smaller files.

                  Compress   Decompress   Decompress   Corpus
           Flag     usage      usage       -s usage     Size

            -1      1100k       500k         350k      914704
            -2      1800k       900k         600k      877703
            -3      2500k      1300k         850k      860338
            -4      3200k      1700k        1100k      846899
            -5      3900k      2100k        1350k      845160
            -6      4600k      2500k        1600k      838626
            -7      5400k      2900k        1850k      834096
            -8      6000k      3300k        2100k      828642
            -9      6700k      3700k        2350k      828642


OPTIONS
       -c --stdout
              Compress or decompress to standard output.  -c will
              decompress multiple files to stdout, but will  only
              compress a single file to stdout.

       -d --decompress
              Force  decompression.  bzip2, bunzip2 and bzcat are
              really the same program,  and  the  decision  about
              what  actions to take is done on the basis of which
              name is used.  This flag overrides that  mechanism,
              and forces bzip2 to decompress.

       -z --compress
              The  complement  to -d: forces compression, regard-
              less of the invokation name.

       -t --test
              Check integrity of the specified file(s), but don't
              decompress  them.   This  really  performs  a trial
              decompression and throws away the result.

       -f --force
              Force overwrite of output files.   Normally,  bzip2
              will not overwrite existing output files.

       -k --keep
              Keep  (don't delete) input files during compression
              or decompression.

       -s --small
              Reduce memory usage, for compression, decompression
              and  testing.   Files  are  decompressed and tested
              using a modified algorithm which only requires  2.5
              bytes  per  block byte.  This means any file can be
              decompressed in 2300k of memory,  albeit  at  about
              half the normal speed.

              During  compression,  -s  selects  a  block size of
              200k, which limits memory use to  around  the  same
              figure,  at  the expense of your compression ratio.
              In short, if your  machine  is  low  on  memory  (8
              megabytes  or  less),  use  -s for everything.  See
              MEMORY MANAGEMENT above.

       -v --verbose
              Verbose mode -- show the compression ratio for each
              file  processed.   Further  -v's  increase the ver-
              bosity level, spewing out lots of information which
              is primarily of interest for diagnostic purposes.

       -L --license -V --version
              Display  the  software  version,  license terms and
              conditions.

       -1 to -9
              Set the block size to 100 k, 200 k ..  900  k  when
              compressing.   Has  no  effect  when decompressing.
              See MEMORY MANAGEMENT above.

       --repetitive-fast
              bzip2 injects some small  pseudo-random  variations
              into  very  repetitive  blocks  to limit worst-case
              performance during compression.   If  sorting  runs
              into  difficulties,  the  block  is randomised, and
              sorting is restarted.  Very roughly, bzip2 persists
              for  three  times  as  long as a well-behaved input
              would take before resorting to randomisation.  This
              flag makes it give up much sooner.

       --repetitive-best
              Opposite  of  --repetitive-fast;  try  a lot harder
              before resorting to randomisation.


RECOVERING DATA FROM DAMAGED FILES
       bzip2 compresses files in blocks, usually 900kbytes  long.
       Each block is handled independently.  If a media or trans-
       mission error causes a multi-block  .bz2  file  to  become
       damaged,  it  may  be  possible  to  recover data from the
       undamaged blocks in the file.

       The compressed representation of each block  is  delimited
       by  a  48-bit pattern, which makes it possible to find the
       block boundaries with reasonable  certainty.   Each  block
       also  carries its own 32-bit CRC, so damaged blocks can be
       distinguished from undamaged ones.

       bzip2recover is a  simple  program  whose  purpose  is  to
       search  for blocks in .bz2 files, and write each block out
       into its own .bz2 file.  You can then use bzip2 -t to test
       the integrity of the resulting files, and decompress those
       which are undamaged.

       bzip2recover takes a single argument, the name of the dam-
       aged file, and writes a number of files "rec0001file.bz2",
       "rec0002file.bz2", etc, containing the  extracted  blocks.
       The  output  filenames  are  designed  so  that the use of
       wildcards in subsequent processing -- for example,  "bzip2
       -dc  rec*file.bz2  > recovered_data" -- lists the files in
       the "right" order.

       bzip2recover should be of most use dealing with large .bz2
       files,  as  these will contain many blocks.  It is clearly
       futile to use it on damaged single-block  files,  since  a
       damaged  block  cannot  be recovered.  If you wish to min-
       imise any potential data loss through media  or  transmis-
       sion errors, you might consider compressing with a smaller
       block size.


PERFORMANCE NOTES
       The sorting phase of compression gathers together  similar
       strings  in  the  file.  Because of this, files containing
       very long runs of  repeated  symbols,  like  "aabaabaabaab
       ..."   (repeated   several  hundred  times)  may  compress
       extraordinarily slowly.  You can use the -vvvvv option  to
       monitor progress in great detail, if you want.  Decompres-
       sion speed is unaffected.

       Such pathological cases seem rare in  practice,  appearing
       mostly in artificially-constructed test files, and in low-
       level disk images.  It may be inadvisable to use bzip2  to
       compress  the  latter.   If you do get a file which causes
       severe slowness in compression, try making the block  size
       as small as possible, with flag -1.

       bzip2  usually  allocates  several  megabytes of memory to
       operate in, and then charges all over it in a fairly  ran-
       dom  fashion.   This means that performance, both for com-
       pressing and decompressing, is largely determined  by  the
       speed  at  which  your  machine  can service cache misses.
       Because of this, small changes to the code to  reduce  the
       miss  rate  have  been observed to give disproportionately
       large performance improvements.  I imagine bzip2 will per-
       form best on machines with very large caches.


CAVEATS
       I/O  error  messages  are not as helpful as they could be.
       Bzip2 tries hard to detect I/O errors  and  exit  cleanly,
       but  the  details  of  what  the problem is sometimes seem
       rather misleading.

       This manual page pertains to version 0.9.0 of bzip2.  Com-
       pressed  data created by this version is entirely forwards
       and backwards compatible with the previous public release,
       version  0.1pl2,  but  with the following exception: 0.9.0
       can correctly decompress multiple concatenated  compressed
       files.   0.1pl2  cannot do this; it will stop after decom-
       pressing just the first file in the stream.

       Wildcard expansion for Windows 95 and NT is flaky.

       bzip2recover uses 32-bit integers to represent  bit  posi-
       tions  in compressed files, so it cannot handle compressed
       files more than 512 megabytes long.  This could easily  be
       fixed.


AUTHOR
       Julian Seward, jseward@@acm.org.

       The ideas embodied in bzip2 are due to (at least) the fol-
       lowing people: Michael Burrows and David Wheeler (for  the
       block  sorting  transformation), David Wheeler (again, for
       the Huffman coder), Peter Fenwick (for the structured cod-
       ing model in the original bzip, and many refinements), and
       Alistair Moffat, Radford Neal  and  Ian  Witten  (for  the
       arithmetic  coder  in  the  original  bzip).   I  am  much
       indebted for their help, support and advice.  See the man-
       ual  in the source distribution for pointers to sources of
       documentation.  Christian von Roques encouraged me to look
       for  faster sorting algorithms, so as to speed up compres-
       sion.  Bela Lubkin encouraged me to improve the worst-case
       compression performance.  Many people sent patches, helped
       with portability problems, lent machines, gave advice  and
       were generally helpful.
@end example





@chapter Programming with @code{libbzip2}

This chapter describes the programming interface to @code{libbzip2}.

For general background information, particularly about memory
use and performance aspects, you'd be well advised to read Chapter 2
as well.

@section Top-level structure

@code{libbzip2} is a flexible library for compressing and decompressing
data in the @code{bzip2} data format.  Although packaged as a single
entity, it helps to regard the library as three separate parts: the low
level interface, and the high level interface, and some utility
functions.

The structure of @code{libbzip2}'s interfaces is similar to
that of Jean-loup Gailly's and Mark Adler's excellent @code{zlib} 
library.

@subsection Low-level summary

This interface provides services for compressing and decompressing
data in memory.  There's no provision for dealing with files, streams
or any other I/O mechanisms, just straight memory-to-memory work.
In fact, this part of the library can be compiled without inclusion
of @code{stdio.h}, which may be helpful for embedded applications.

The low-level part of the library has no global variables and
is therefore thread-safe.

Six routines make up the low level interface: 
@code{bzCompressInit}, @code{bzCompress}, and @* @code{bzCompressEnd}
for compression,
and a corresponding trio @code{bzDecompressInit}, @* @code{bzDecompress}
and @code{bzDecompressEnd} for decompression.  
The @code{*Init} functions allocate
memory for compression/decompression and do other
initialisations, whilst the @code{*End} functions close down operations
and release memory.

The real work is done by @code{bzCompress} and @code{bzDecompress}.  
These compress/decompress data from a user-supplied input buffer
to a user-supplied output buffer.  These buffers can be any size;
arbitrary quantities of data are handled by making repeated calls
to these functions.  This is a flexible mechanism allowing a 
consumer-pull style of activity, or producer-push, or a mixture of
both.



@subsection High-level summary

This interface provides some handy wrappers around the low-level
interface to facilitate reading and writing @code{bzip2} format
files (@code{.bz2} files).  The routines provide hooks to facilitate
reading files in which the @code{bzip2} data stream is embedded 
within some larger-scale file structure, or where there are
multiple @code{bzip2} data streams concatenated end-to-end.

For reading files, @code{bzReadOpen}, @code{bzRead}, @code{bzReadClose}
and @code{bzReadGetUnused} are supplied.  For writing files,
@code{bzWriteOpen}, @code{bzWrite} and @code{bzWriteFinish} are
available.

As with the low-level library, no global variables are used
so the library is per se thread-safe.  However, if I/O errors
occur whilst reading or writing the underlying compressed files,
you may have to consult @code{errno} to determine the cause of
the error.  In that case, you'd need a C library which correctly
supports @code{errno} in a multithreaded environment.

To make the library a little simpler and more portable,
@code{bzReadOpen} and @code{bzWriteOpen} require you to pass them file
handles (@code{FILE*}s) which have previously been opened for reading or
writing respectively.  That avoids portability problems associated with
file operations and file attributes, whilst not being much of an
imposition on the programmer.



@subsection Utility functions summary
For very simple needs, @code{bzBuffToBuffCompress} and
@code{bzBuffToBuffDecompress} are provided.  These compress
data in memory from one buffer to another buffer in a single
function call.  You should assess whether these functions
fulfill your memory-to-memory compression/decompression
requirements before investing effort in understanding the more
general but more complex low-level interface.

Yoshioka Tsuneo (@code{QWF00133@@niftyserve.or.jp} /
@code{tsuneo-y@@is.aist-nara.ac.jp}) has contributed some functions to
give better @code{zlib} compatibility.  These functions are
@code{bzopen}, @code{bzread}, @code{bzwrite}, @code{bzflush},
@code{bzclose},
@code{bzerror} and @code{bzlibVersion}.  You may find these functions
more convenient for simple file reading and writing, than those in the
high-level interface.  These functions are not (yet) officially part of
the library, and are not further documented here.  If they break, you
get to keep all the pieces.  I hope to document them properly when time
permits.

Yoshioka also contributed modifications to allow the library to be
built as a Windows DLL.


@section Error handling

The library is designed to recover cleanly in all situations, including
the worst-case situation of decompressing random data.  I'm not 
100% sure that it can always do this, so you might want to add
a signal handler to catch segmentation violations during decompression
if you are feeling especially paranoid.  I would be interested in
hearing more about the robustness of the library to corrupted
compressed data.

The file @code{bzlib.h} contains all definitions needed to use
the library.  In particular, you should definitely not include
@code{bzlib_private.h}.

In @code{bzlib.h}, the various return values are defined.  The following
list is not intended as an exhaustive description of the circumstances 
in which a given value may be returned -- those descriptions are given
later.  Rather, it is intended to convey the rough meaning of each
return value.  The first five actions are normal and not intended to 
denote an error situation.
@table @code
@item BZ_OK
The requested action was completed successfully.
@item BZ_RUN_OK
@itemx BZ_FLUSH_OK
@itemx BZ_FINISH_OK
In @code{bzCompress}, the requested flush/finish/nothing-special action
was completed successfully.
@item BZ_STREAM_END
Compression of data was completed, or the logical stream end was
detected during decompression.
@end table

The following return values indicate an error of some kind.
@table @code
@item BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR
When using the library, it is important to call the functions in the
correct sequence and with data structures (buffers etc) in the correct
states.  @code{libbzip2} checks as much as it can to ensure this is
happening, and returns @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR} if not.  Code which
complies precisely with the function semantics, as detailed below,
should never receive this value; such an event denotes buggy code
which you should investigate.
@item BZ_PARAM_ERROR
Returned when a parameter to a function call is out of range 
or otherwise manifestly incorrect.  As with @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR},
this denotes a bug in the client code.  The distinction between
@code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR} and @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR} is a bit hazy, but still worth
making.
@item BZ_MEM_ERROR
Returned when a request to allocate memory failed.  Note that the
quantity of memory needed to decompress a stream cannot be determined
until the stream's header has been read.  So @code{bzDecompress} and
@code{bzRead} may return @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR} even though some of
the compressed data has been read.  The same is not true for
compression; once @code{bzCompressInit} or @code{bzWriteOpen} have
successfully completed, @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR} cannot occur.
@item BZ_DATA_ERROR
Returned when a data integrity error is detected during decompression.
Most importantly, this means when stored and computed CRCs for the
data do not match.  This value is also returned upon detection of any
other anomaly in the compressed data.
@item BZ_DATA_ERROR_MAGIC
As a special case of @code{BZ_DATA_ERROR}, it is sometimes useful to
know when the compressed stream does not start with the correct
magic bytes (@code{'B' 'Z' 'h'}).  
@item BZ_IO_ERROR
Returned by @code{bzRead} and @code{bzRead} when there is an error
reading or writing in the compressed file, and by @code{bzReadOpen}
and @code{bzWriteOpen} for attempts to use a file for which the
error indicator (viz, @code{ferror(f)}) is set.
On receipt of @code{BZ_IO_ERROR}, the caller should consult
@code{errno} and/or @code{perror} to acquire operating-system
specific information about the problem.
@item BZ_UNEXPECTED_EOF
Returned by @code{bzRead} when the compressed file finishes
before the logical end of stream is detected.
@item BZ_OUTBUFF_FULL
Returned by @code{bzBuffToBuffCompress} and
@code{bzBuffToBuffDecompress} to indicate that the output data
will not fit into the output buffer provided.
@end table



@section Low-level interface

@subsection @code{bzCompressInit}
@example
typedef 
   struct @{
      char *next_in;
      unsigned int avail_in;
      unsigned int total_in;

      char *next_out;
      unsigned int avail_out;
      unsigned int total_out;

      void *state;

      void *(*bzalloc)(void *,int,int);
      void (*bzfree)(void *,void *);
      void *opaque;
   @} 
   bz_stream;

int bzCompressInit ( bz_stream *strm, 
                     int blockSize100k, 
                     int verbosity,
                     int workFactor );

@end example

Prepares for compression.  The @code{bz_stream} structure
holds all data pertaining to the compression activity.  
A @code{bz_stream} structure should be allocated and initialised
prior to the call.
The fields of @code{bz_stream}
comprise the entirety of the user-visible data.  @code{state}
is a pointer to the private data structures required for compression.

Custom memory allocators are supported, via fields @code{bzalloc}, 
@code{bzfree},
and @code{opaque}.  The value 
@code{opaque} is passed to as the first argument to
all calls to @code{bzalloc} and @code{bzfree}, but is 
otherwise ignored by the library.
The call @code{bzalloc ( opaque, n, m )} is expected to return a 
pointer @code{p} to
@code{n * m} bytes of memory, and @code{bzfree ( opaque, p )} 
should free
that memory.

If you don't want to use a custom memory allocator, set @code{bzalloc}, 
@code{bzfree} and
@code{opaque} to @code{NULL}, 
and the library will then use the standard @code{malloc}/@code{free}
routines.

Before calling @code{bzCompressInit}, fields @code{bzalloc}, 
@code{bzfree} and @code{opaque} should
be filled appropriately, as just described.  Upon return, the internal
state will have been allocated and initialised, and @code{total_in} and 
@code{total_out} will have been set to zero.  
These last two fields are used by the library
to inform the caller of the total amount of data passed into and out of
the library, respectively.  You should not try to change them.

Parameter @code{blockSize100k} specifies the block size to be used for
compression.  It should be a value between 1 and 9 inclusive, and the
actual block size used is 100000 x this figure.  9 gives the best
compression but takes most memory.

Parameter @code{verbosity} should be set to a number between 0 and 4
inclusive.  0 is silent, and greater numbers give increasingly verbose
monitoring/debugging output.  If the library has been compiled with
@code{-DBZ_NO_STDIO}, no such output will appear for any verbosity
setting.

Parameter @code{workFactor} controls how the compression phase behaves
when presented with worst case, highly repetitive, input data.
If compression runs into difficulties caused by repetitive data,
some pseudo-random variations are inserted into the block, and
compression is restarted.  Lower values of @code{workFactor}
reduce the tolerance of compression to repetitive data.
You should set this parameter carefully; too low, and 
compression ratio suffers, too high, and your average-to-worst
case compression times can become very large.  
The default value of 30
gives reasonable behaviour over a wide range of circumstances.

Allowable values range from 0 to 250 inclusive.  0 is a special
case, equivalent to using the default value of 30.

Note that the randomisation process is entirely transparent.  
If the library decides to randomise and restart compression on a
block, it does so without comment.  Randomised blocks are
automatically de-randomised during decompression, so data
integrity is never compromised.

Possible return values:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR} 
         if @code{strm} is @code{NULL} 
         or @code{blockSize} < 1 or @code{blockSize} > 9
         or @code{verbosity} < 0 or @code{verbosity} > 4
         or @code{workFactor} < 0 or @code{workFactor} > 250
      @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR} 
         if not enough memory is available
      @code{BZ_OK} 
         otherwise
@end display
Allowable next actions:
@display
      @code{bzCompress} 
         if @code{BZ_OK} is returned
      no specific action needed in case of error
@end display

@subsection @code{bzCompress}
@example
   int bzCompress ( bz_stream *strm, int action );
@end example
Provides more input and/or output buffer space for the library.  The
caller maintains input and output buffers, and calls @code{bzCompress} to
transfer data between them.

Before each call to @code{bzCompress}, @code{next_in} should point at
the data to be compressed, and @code{avail_in} should indicate how many
bytes the library may read.  @code{bzCompress} updates @code{next_in},
@code{avail_in} and @code{total_in} to reflect the number of bytes it
has read.

Similarly, @code{next_out} should point to a buffer in which the
compressed data is to be placed, with @code{avail_out} indicating how
much output space is available.  @code{bzCompress} updates
@code{next_out}, @code{avail_out} and @code{total_out} to reflect the
number of bytes output.

You may provide and remove as little or as much data as you like on each
call of @code{bzCompress}.  In the limit, it is acceptable to supply and
remove data one byte at a time, although this would be terribly
inefficient.  You should always ensure that at least one byte of output
space is available at each call.

A second purpose of @code{bzCompress} is to request a change of mode of the
compressed stream.  

Conceptually, a compressed stream can be in one of four states: IDLE,
RUNNING, FLUSHING and FINISHING.  Before initialisation
(@code{bzCompressInit}) and after termination (@code{bzCompressEnd}), a
stream is regarded as IDLE.

Upon initialisation (@code{bzCompressInit}), the stream is placed in the
RUNNING state.  Subsequent calls to @code{bzCompress} should pass
@code{BZ_RUN} as the requested action; other actions are illegal and
will result in @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR}.

At some point, the calling program will have provided all the input data
it wants to.  It will then want to finish up -- in effect, asking the
library to process any data it might have buffered internally.  In this
state, @code{bzCompress} will no longer attempt to read data from
@code{next_in}, but it will want to write data to @code{next_out}.
Because the output buffer supplied by the user can be arbitrarily small,
the finishing-up operation cannot necessarily be done with a single call
of @code{bzCompress}.

Instead, the calling program passes @code{BZ_FINISH} as an action to
@code{bzCompress}.  This changes the stream's state to FINISHING.  Any
remaining input (ie, @code{next_in[0 .. avail_in-1]}) is compressed and
transferred to the output buffer.  To do this, @code{bzCompress} must be
called repeatedly until all the output has been consumed.  At that
point, @code{bzCompress} returns @code{BZ_STREAM_END}, and the stream's
state is set back to IDLE.  @code{bzCompressEnd} should then be
called.

Just to make sure the calling program does not cheat, the library makes
a note of @code{avail_in} at the time of the first call to
@code{bzCompress} which has @code{BZ_FINISH} as an action (ie, at the
time the program has announced its intention to not supply any more
input).  By comparing this value with that of @code{avail_in} over
subsequent calls to @code{bzCompress}, the library can detect any
attempts to slip in more data to compress.  Any calls for which this is
detected will return @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR}.  This indicates a
programming mistake which should be corrected.

Instead of asking to finish, the calling program may ask
@code{bzCompress} to take all the remaining input, compress it and
terminate the current (Burrows-Wheeler) compression block.  This could
be useful for error control purposes.  The mechanism is analogous to
that for finishing: call @code{bzCompress} with an action of
@code{BZ_FLUSH}, remove output data, and persist with the
@code{BZ_FLUSH} action until the value @code{BZ_RUN} is returned.  As
with finishing, @code{bzCompress} detects any attempt to provide more
input data once the flush has begun.

Once the flush is complete, the stream returns to the normal RUNNING
state.

This all sounds pretty complex, but isn't really.  Here's a table
which shows which actions are allowable in each state, what action
will be taken, what the next state is, and what the non-error return
values are.  Note that you can't explicitly ask what state the
stream is in, but nor do you need to -- it can be inferred from the
values returned by @code{bzCompress}.
@display
IDLE/@code{any}           
      Illegal.  IDLE state only exists after @code{bzCompressEnd} or
      before @code{bzCompressInit}.
      Return value = @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR}

RUNNING/@code{BZ_RUN}     
      Compress from @code{next_in} to @code{next_out} as much as possible.
      Next state = RUNNING
      Return value = @code{BZ_RUN_OK}

RUNNING/@code{BZ_FLUSH}   
      Remember current value of @code{next_in}.  Compress from @code{next_in}
      to @code{next_out} as much as possible, but do not accept any more input.  
      Next state = FLUSHING
      Return value = @code{BZ_FLUSH_OK}

RUNNING/@code{BZ_FINISH}  
      Remember current value of @code{next_in}.  Compress from @code{next_in}
      to @code{next_out} as much as possible, but do not accept any more input.
      Next state = FINISHING
      Return value = @code{BZ_FINISH_OK}

FLUSHING/@code{BZ_FLUSH}  
      Compress from @code{next_in} to @code{next_out} as much as possible, 
      but do not accept any more input.  
      If all the existing input has been used up
         Next state = RUNNING; Return value = @code{BZ_RUN_OK}
      else
         Next state = FLUSHING; Return value = @code{BZ_FLUSH_OK}

FLUSHING/other     
      Illegal.
      Return value = @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR}

FINISHING/@code{BZ_FINISH}  
      Compress from @code{next_in} to @code{next_out} as much as possible,
      but to not accept any more input.  
      If all the existing input has been used up and all compressed
      output has been removed
         Next state = IDLE; Return value = @code{BZ_STREAM_END}
      else
         Next state = FINISHING; Return value = @code{BZ_FINISHING}

FINISHING/other
      Illegal.
      Return value = @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR}
@end display

That still looks complicated?  Well, fair enough.  The usual sequence
of calls for compressing a load of data is:
@itemize @bullet
@item Get started with @code{bzCompressInit}.
@item Shovel data in and shlurp out its compressed form using zero or more
calls of @code{bzCompress} with action = @code{BZ_RUN}.
@item Finish up.  
Repeatedly call @code{bzCompress} with action = @code{BZ_FINISH}, 
copying out the compressed output, until @code{BZ_STREAM_END} is returned.
@item Close up and go home.  Call @code{bzCompressEnd}.
@end itemize
If the data you want to compress fits into your input buffer all
at once, you can skip the calls of @code{bzCompress ( ..., BZ_RUN )} and 
just do the @code{bzCompress ( ..., BZ_FINISH )} calls.

All required memory is allocated by @code{bzCompressInit}.  The
compression library can accept any data at all (obviously).  So you
shouldn't get any error return values from the @code{bzCompress} calls.
If you do, they will be @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR}, and indicate a bug in
your programming.

Trivial other possible return values:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR}   
         if @code{strm} is @code{NULL}, or @code{strm->s} is @code{NULL}
@end display

@subsection @code{bzCompressEnd}
@example
int bzCompressEnd ( bz_stream *strm );
@end example
Releases all memory associated with a compression stream.

Possible return values:
@display
   @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR}    if @code{strm} is @code{NULL} or @code{strm->s} is @code{NULL}
   @code{BZ_OK}    otherwise
@end display


@subsection @code{bzDecompressInit}
@example
int bzDecompressInit ( bz_stream *strm, int verbosity, int small );
@end example
Prepares for decompression.  As with @code{bzCompressInit}, a
@code{bz_stream} record should be allocated and initialised before the
call.  Fields @code{bzalloc}, @code{bzfree} and @code{opaque} should be
set if a custom memory allocator is required, or made @code{NULL} for
the normal @code{malloc}/@code{free} routines.  Upon return, the internal
state will have been initialised, and @code{total_in} and
@code{total_out} will be zero.

For the meaning of parameter @code{verbosity}, see @code{bzCompressInit}.

If @code{small} is nonzero, the library will use an alternative
decompression algorithm which uses less memory but at the cost of
decompressing more slowly (roughly speaking, half the speed, but the
maximum memory requirement drops to around 2300k).  See Chapter 2 for
more information on memory management.

Note that the amount of memory needed to decompress
a stream cannot be determined until the stream's header has been read,
so even if @code{bzDecompressInit} succeeds, a subsequent
@code{bzDecompress} could fail with @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR}.

Possible return values:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR}
         if @code{(small != 0 && small != 1)}
         or @code{(verbosity < 0 || verbosity > 4)}
      @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR}
         if insufficient memory is available
@end display

Allowable next actions:
@display
      @code{bzDecompress}
         if @code{BZ_OK} was returned
      no specific action required in case of error
@end display

 

@subsection @code{bzDecompress}
@example
int bzDecompress ( bz_stream *strm );
@end example
Provides more input and/out output buffer space for the library.  The
caller maintains input and output buffers, and uses @code{bzDecompress}
to transfer data between them.

Before each call to @code{bzDecompress}, @code{next_in} 
should point at the compressed data,
and @code{avail_in} should indicate how many bytes the library
may read.  @code{bzDecompress} updates @code{next_in}, @code{avail_in} 
and @code{total_in}
to reflect the number of bytes it has read.

Similarly, @code{next_out} should point to a buffer in which the uncompressed
output is to be placed, with @code{avail_out} indicating how much output space
is available.  @code{bzCompress} updates @code{next_out},
@code{avail_out} and @code{total_out} to reflect
the number of bytes output.

You may provide and remove as little or as much data as you like on
each call of @code{bzDecompress}.  
In the limit, it is acceptable to
supply and remove data one byte at a time, although this would be
terribly inefficient.  You should always ensure that at least one
byte of output space is available at each call.

Use of @code{bzDecompress} is simpler than @code{bzCompress}.

You should provide input and remove output as described above, and
repeatedly call @code{bzDecompress} until @code{BZ_STREAM_END} is
returned.  Appearance of @code{BZ_STREAM_END} denotes that
@code{bzDecompress} has detected the logical end of the compressed
stream.  @code{bzDecompress} will not produce @code{BZ_STREAM_END} until
all output data has been placed into the output buffer, so once
@code{BZ_STREAM_END} appears, you are guaranteed to have available all
the decompressed output, and @code{bzDecompressEnd} can safely be
called.

If case of an error return value, you should call @code{bzDecompressEnd}
to clean up and release memory.

Possible return values:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR}
         if @code{strm} is @code{NULL} or @code{strm->s} is @code{NULL}
         or @code{strm->avail_out < 1}
      @code{BZ_DATA_ERROR}
         if a data integrity error is detected in the compressed stream
      @code{BZ_DATA_ERROR_MAGIC}
         if the compressed stream doesn't begin with the right magic bytes
      @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR}
         if there wasn't enough memory available
      @code{BZ_STREAM_END}
         if the logical end of the data stream was detected and all
         output in has been consumed, eg @code{s->avail_out > 0}
      @code{BZ_OK}
         otherwise
@end display
Allowable next actions:
@display
      @code{bzDecompress}
         if @code{BZ_OK} was returned
      @code{bzDecompressEnd}
         otherwise
@end display


@subsection @code{bzDecompressEnd}
@example
int bzDecompressEnd ( bz_stream *strm );
@end example
Releases all memory associated with a decompression stream.

Possible return values:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR}
         if @code{strm} is @code{NULL} or @code{strm->s} is @code{NULL}
      @code{BZ_OK}
         otherwise
@end display

Allowable next actions:
@display
      None.
@end display


@section High-level interface

This interface provides functions for reading and writing 
@code{bzip2} format files.  First, some general points.

@itemize @bullet
@item All of the functions take an @code{int*} first argument,
  @code{bzerror}.
  After each call, @code{bzerror} should be consulted first to determine
  the outcome of the call.  If @code{bzerror} is @code{BZ_OK}, 
  the call completed
  successfully, and only then should the return value of the function
  (if any) be consulted.  If @code{bzerror} is @code{BZ_IO_ERROR}, 
  there was an error
  reading/writing the underlying compressed file, and you should
  then consult @code{errno}/@code{perror} to determine the 
  cause of the difficulty.
  @code{bzerror} may also be set to various other values; precise details are
  given on a per-function basis below.
@item If @code{bzerror} indicates an error 
  (ie, anything except @code{BZ_OK} and @code{BZ_STREAM_END}),
  you should immediately call @code{bzReadClose} (or @code{bzWriteClose},
  depending on whether you are attempting to read or to write)
  to free up all resources associated
  with the stream.  Once an error has been indicated, behaviour of all calls
  except @code{bzReadClose} (@code{bzWriteClose}) is undefined.  
  The implication is that (1) @code{bzerror} should
  be checked after each call, and (2) if @code{bzerror} indicates an error, 
  @code{bzReadClose} (@code{bzWriteClose}) should then be called to clean up.
@item The @code{FILE*} arguments passed to
   @code{bzReadOpen}/@code{bzWriteOpen}  
  should be set to binary mode.
  Most Unix systems will do this by default, but other platforms,
  including Windows and Mac, will not.  If you omit this, you may
  encounter problems when moving code to new platforms.
@item Memory allocation requests are handled by
  @code{malloc}/@code{free}.  
  At present
  there is no facility for user-defined memory allocators in the file I/O
  functions (could easily be added, though).
@end itemize



@subsection @code{bzReadOpen}
@example
   typedef void BZFILE;

   BZFILE *bzReadOpen ( int *bzerror, FILE *f, 
                        int small, int verbosity,
                        void *unused, int nUnused );
@end example
Prepare to read compressed data from file handle @code{f}.  @code{f}
should refer to a file which has been opened for reading, and for which
the error indicator (@code{ferror(f)})is not set.  If @code{small} is 1,
the library will try to decompress using less memory, at the expense of
speed.

For reasons explained below, @code{bzRead} will decompress the
@code{nUnused} bytes starting at @code{unused}, before starting to read
from the file @code{f}.  At most @code{BZ_MAX_UNUSED} bytes may be
supplied like this.  If this facility is not required, you should pass
@code{NULL} and @code{0} for @code{unused} and n@code{Unused}
respectively.

For the meaning of parameters @code{small} and @code{verbosity},
see @code{bzDecompressInit}.

The amount of memory needed to decompress a file cannot be determined
until the file's header has been read.  So it is possible that
@code{bzReadOpen} returns @code{BZ_OK} but a subsequent call of
@code{bzRead} will return @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR}.

Possible assignments to @code{bzerror}:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR}
         if @code{f} is @code{NULL} 
         or @code{small} is neither @code{0} nor @code{1}                 
         or @code{(unused == NULL && nUnused != 0)}
         or @code{(unused != NULL && !(0 <= nUnused <= BZ_MAX_UNUSED))}
      @code{BZ_IO_ERROR}    
         if @code{ferror(f)} is nonzero
      @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR}   
         if insufficient memory is available
      @code{BZ_OK}
         otherwise.
@end display

Possible return values:
@display
      Pointer to an abstract @code{BZFILE}        
         if @code{bzerror} is @code{BZ_OK}   
      @code{NULL}
         otherwise
@end display

Allowable next actions:
@display
      @code{bzRead}
         if @code{bzerror} is @code{BZ_OK}   
      @code{bzClose} 
         otherwise
@end display


@subsection @code{bzRead}
@example
   int bzRead ( int *bzerror, BZFILE *b, void *buf, int len );
@end example
Reads up to @code{len} (uncompressed) bytes from the compressed file 
@code{b} into
the buffer @code{buf}.  If the read was successful, 
@code{bzerror} is set to @code{BZ_OK}
and the number of bytes read is returned.  If the logical end-of-stream
was detected, @code{bzerror} will be set to @code{BZ_STREAM_END}, 
and the number
of bytes read is returned.  All other @code{bzerror} values denote an error.

@code{bzRead} will supply @code{len} bytes,
unless the logical stream end is detected
or an error occurs.  Because of this, it is possible to detect the 
stream end by observing when the number of bytes returned is 
less than the number
requested.  Nevertheless, this is regarded as inadvisable; you should
instead check @code{bzerror} after every call and watch out for
@code{BZ_STREAM_END}.

Internally, @code{bzRead} copies data from the compressed file in chunks
of size @code{BZ_MAX_UNUSED} bytes
before decompressing it.  If the file contains more bytes than strictly
needed to reach the logical end-of-stream, @code{bzRead} will almost certainly
read some of the trailing data before signalling @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_END}.
To collect the read but unused data once @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_END} has 
appeared, call @code{bzReadGetUnused} immediately before @code{bzReadClose}.

Possible assignments to @code{bzerror}:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR}
         if @code{b} is @code{NULL} or @code{buf} is @code{NULL} or @code{len < 0}
      @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR} 
         if @code{b} was opened with @code{bzWriteOpen}
      @code{BZ_IO_ERROR} 
         if there is an error reading from the compressed file
      @code{BZ_UNEXPECTED_EOF} 
         if the compressed file ended before the logical end-of-stream was detected
      @code{BZ_DATA_ERROR} 
         if a data integrity error was detected in the compressed stream
      @code{BZ_DATA_ERROR_MAGIC}
         if the stream does not begin with the requisite header bytes (ie, is not 
         a @code{bzip2} data file).  This is really a special case of @code{BZ_DATA_ERROR}.
      @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR} 
         if insufficient memory was available
      @code{BZ_STREAM_END} 
         if the logical end of stream was detected.
      @code{BZ_OK}
         otherwise.
@end display

Possible return values:
@display
      number of bytes read
         if @code{bzerror} is @code{BZ_OK} or @code{BZ_STREAM_END}
      undefined
         otherwise
@end display

Allowable next actions:
@display
      collect data from @code{buf}, then @code{bzRead} or @code{bzReadClose}
         if @code{bzerror} is @code{BZ_OK} 
      collect data from @code{buf}, then @code{bzReadClose} or @code{bzReadGetUnused} 
         if @code{bzerror} is @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_END}   
      @code{bzReadClose} 
         otherwise
@end display



@subsection @code{bzReadGetUnused}
@example
   void bzReadGetUnused ( int* bzerror, BZFILE *b, 
                          void** unused, int* nUnused );
@end example
Returns data which was read from the compressed file but was not needed
to get to the logical end-of-stream.  @code{*unused} is set to the address
of the data, and @code{*nUnused} to the number of bytes.  @code{*nUnused} will
be set to a value between @code{0} and @code{BZ_MAX_UNUSED} inclusive.

This function may only be called once @code{bzRead} has signalled 
@code{BZ_STREAM_END} but before @code{bzReadClose}.

Possible assignments to @code{bzerror}:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR} 
         if @code{b} is @code{NULL} 
         or @code{unused} is @code{NULL} or @code{nUnused} is @code{NULL}
      @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR} 
         if @code{BZ_STREAM_END} has not been signalled
         or if @code{b} was opened with @code{bzWriteOpen}
     @code{BZ_OK}
         otherwise
@end display

Allowable next actions:
@display 
      @code{bzReadClose}
@end display


@subsection @code{bzReadClose}
@example
   void bzReadClose ( int *bzerror, BZFILE *b );
@end example
Releases all memory pertaining to the compressed file @code{b}.  
@code{bzReadClose} does not call @code{fclose} on the underlying file
handle, so you should do that yourself if appropriate.
@code{bzReadClose} should be called to clean up after all error
situations.

Possible assignments to @code{bzerror}:
@display
      @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR} 
         if @code{b} was opened with @code{bzOpenWrite} 
      @code{BZ_OK} 
         otherwise
@end display

Allowable next actions:
@display
      none
@end display



@subsection @code{bzWriteOpen}
@example
   BZFILE *bzWriteOpen ( int *bzerror, FILE *f, 
                         int blockSize100k, int verbosity,
                         int workFactor );
@end example
Prepare to write compressed data to file handle @code{f}.  
@code{f} should refer to
a file which has been opened for writing, and for which the error
indicator (@code{ferror(f)})is not set.  

For the meaning of parameters @code{blockSize100k},
@code{verbosity} and @code{workFactor}, see
@* @code{bzCompressInit}.

All required memory is allocated at this stage, so if the call
completes successfully, @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR} cannot be signalled by a
subsequent call to @code{bzWrite}.

Possible assignments to @code{bzerror}:
@display 
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR} 
         if @code{f} is @code{NULL} 
         or @code{blockSize100k < 1} or @code{blockSize100k > 9}
      @code{BZ_IO_ERROR} 
         if @code{ferror(f)} is nonzero
      @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR} 
         if insufficient memory is available
      @code{BZ_OK} 
         otherwise
@end display

Possible return values:
@display
      Pointer to an abstract @code{BZFILE}  
         if @code{bzerror} is @code{BZ_OK}   
      @code{NULL} 
         otherwise
@end display

Allowable next actions:
@display
      @code{bzWrite} 
         if @code{bzerror} is @code{BZ_OK} 
         (you could go directly to @code{bzWriteClose}, but this would be pretty pointless)
      @code{bzWriteClose} 
         otherwise
@end display



@subsection @code{bzWrite}
@example
   void bzWrite ( int *bzerror, BZFILE *b, void *buf, int len );
@end example
Absorbs @code{len} bytes from the buffer @code{buf}, eventually to be
compressed and written to the file.

Possible assignments to @code{bzerror}:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR} 
         if @code{b} is @code{NULL} or @code{buf} is @code{NULL} or @code{len < 0}
      @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR} 
         if b was opened with @code{bzReadOpen}
      @code{BZ_IO_ERROR} 
         if there is an error writing the compressed file.
      @code{BZ_OK} 
         otherwise
@end display




@subsection @code{bzWriteClose}
@example
   int bzWriteClose ( int *bzerror, BZFILE* f,
                      int abandon,
                      unsigned int* nbytes_in,
                      unsigned int* nbytes_out );
@end example

Compresses and flushes to the compressed file all data so far supplied
by @code{bzWrite}.  The logical end-of-stream markers are also written, so
subsequent calls to @code{bzWrite} are illegal.  All memory associated 
with the compressed file @code{b} is released.  
@code{fflush} is called on the
compressed file, but it is not @code{fclose}'d.

If @code{bzWriteClose} is called to clean up after an error, the only
action is to release the memory.  The library records the error codes
issued by previous calls, so this situation will be detected
automatically.  There is no attempt to complete the compression
operation, nor to @code{fflush} the compressed file.  You can force this
behaviour to happen even in the case of no error, by passing a nonzero
value to @code{abandon}.

If @code{nbytes_in} is non-null, @code{*nbytes_in} will be set to be the
total volume of uncompressed data handled.  Similarly, @code{nbytes_out}
will be set to the total volume of compressed data written.

Possible assignments to @code{bzerror}:
@display
      @code{BZ_SEQUENCE_ERROR} 
         if @code{b} was opened with @code{bzReadOpen}
      @code{BZ_IO_ERROR} 
         if there is an error writing the compressed file
      @code{BZ_OK} 
         otherwise
@end display

@subsection Handling embedded compressed data streams

The high-level library facilitates use of
@code{bzip2} data streams which form some part of a surrounding, larger
data stream.
@itemize @bullet
@item For writing, the library takes an open file handle, writes
compressed data to it, @code{fflush}es it but does not @code{fclose} it.
The calling application can write its own data before and after the
compressed data stream, using that same file handle.
@item Reading is more complex, and the facilities are not as general
as they could be since generality is hard to reconcile with efficiency.
@code{bzRead} reads from the compressed file in blocks of size
@code{BZ_MAX_UNUSED} bytes, and in doing so probably will overshoot
the logical end of compressed stream.
To recover this data once decompression has
ended, call @code{bzReadGetUnused} after the last call of @code{bzRead}
(the one returning @code{BZ_STREAM_END}) but before calling
@code{bzReadClose}.
@end itemize

This mechanism makes it easy to decompress multiple @code{bzip2}
streams placed end-to-end.  As the end of one stream, when @code{bzRead}
returns @code{BZ_STREAM_END}, call @code{bzReadGetUnused} to collect the
unused data (copy it into your own buffer somewhere).  
That data forms the start of the next compressed stream.
To start uncompressing that next stream, call @code{bzReadOpen} again,
feeding in the unused data via the @code{unused}/@code{nUnused}
parameters.
Keep doing this until @code{BZ_STREAM_END} return coincides with the
physical end of file (@code{feof(f)}).  In this situation
@code{bzReadGetUnused}
will of course return no data.

This should give some feel for how the high-level interface can be used.
If you require extra flexibility, you'll have to bite the bullet and get
to grips with the low-level interface.

@subsection Standard file-reading/writing code
Here's how you'd write data to a compressed file:
@example @code
FILE*   f;
BZFILE* b;
int     nBuf;
char    buf[ /* whatever size you like */ ];
int     bzerror;
int     nWritten;

f = fopen ( "myfile.bz2", "w" );
if (!f) @{
   /* handle error */
@}
b = bzWriteOpen ( &bzerror, f, 9 );
if (bzerror != BZ_OK) @{
   bzWriteClose ( b );
   /* handle error */
@}

while ( /* condition */ ) @{
   /* get data to write into buf, and set nBuf appropriately */
   nWritten = bzWrite ( &bzerror, b, buf, nBuf );
   if (bzerror == BZ_IO_ERROR) @{ 
      bzWriteClose ( &bzerror, b );
      /* handle error */
   @}
@}

bzWriteClose ( &bzerror, b );
if (bzerror == BZ_IO_ERROR) @{
   /* handle error */
@}
@end example
And to read from a compressed file:
@example
FILE*   f;
BZFILE* b;
int     nBuf;
char    buf[ /* whatever size you like */ ];
int     bzerror;
int     nWritten;

f = fopen ( "myfile.bz2", "r" );
if (!f) @{
   /* handle error */
@}
b = bzReadOpen ( &bzerror, f, 0, NULL, 0 );
if (bzerror != BZ_OK) @{
   bzReadClose ( &bzerror, b );
   /* handle error */
@}

bzerror = BZ_OK;
while (bzerror == BZ_OK && /* arbitrary other conditions */) @{
   nBuf = bzRead ( &bzerror, b, buf, /* size of buf */ );
   if (bzerror == BZ_OK) @{
      /* do something with buf[0 .. nBuf-1] */
   @}
@}
if (bzerror != BZ_STREAM_END) @{
   bzReadClose ( &bzerror, b );
   /* handle error */
@} else @{
   bzReadClose ( &bzerror );
@}
@end example



@section Utility functions
@subsection @code{bzBuffToBuffCompress}
@example
   int bzBuffToBuffCompress( char*         dest,
                             unsigned int* destLen,
                             char*         source,
                             unsigned int  sourceLen,
                             int           blockSize100k,
                             int           verbosity,
                             int           workFactor );
@end example
Attempts to compress the data in @code{source[0 .. sourceLen-1]}
into the destination buffer, @code{dest[0 .. *destLen-1]}.
If the destination buffer is big enough, @code{*destLen} is
set to the size of the compressed data, and @code{BZ_OK} is
returned.  If the compressed data won't fit, @code{*destLen}
is unchanged, and @code{BZ_OUTBUFF_FULL} is returned.

Compression in this manner is a one-shot event, done with a single call
to this function.  The resulting compressed data is a complete
@code{bzip2} format data stream.  There is no mechanism for making
additional calls to provide extra input data.  If you want that kind of
mechanism, use the low-level interface.

For the meaning of parameters @code{blockSize100k}, @code{verbosity}
and @code{workFactor}, @* see @code{bzCompressInit}.

To guarantee that the compressed data will fit in its buffer, allocate
an output buffer of size 1% larger than the uncompressed data, plus
fifty bytes.

@code{bzBuffToBuffDecompress} will not write data at or
beyond @code{dest[*destLen]}, even in case of buffer overflow.

Possible return values:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR} 
         if @code{dest} is @code{NULL} or @code{destLen} is @code{NULL}
         or @code{blockSize100k < 1} or @code{blockSize100k > 9}
         or @code{verbosity < 0} or @code{verbosity > 4} 
         or @code{workFactor < 0} or @code{workFactor > 250}
      @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR}
         if insufficient memory is available 
      @code{BZ_OUTBUFF_FULL}
         if the size of the compressed data exceeds @code{*destLen}
      @code{BZ_OK} 
         otherwise
@end display



@subsection @code{bzBuffToBuffDecompress}
@example
   int bzBuffToBuffDecompress ( char*         dest,
                                unsigned int* destLen,
                                char*         source,
                                unsigned int  sourceLen,
                                int           small,
                                int           verbosity );
@end example
Attempts to decompress the data in @code{source[0 .. sourceLen-1]}
into the destination buffer, @code{dest[0 .. *destLen-1]}.
If the destination buffer is big enough, @code{*destLen} is
set to the size of the uncompressed data, and @code{BZ_OK} is
returned.  If the compressed data won't fit, @code{*destLen}
is unchanged, and @code{BZ_OUTBUFF_FULL} is returned.

@code{source} is assumed to hold a complete @code{bzip2} format
data stream.  @code{bzBuffToBuffDecompress} tries to decompress
the entirety of the stream into the output buffer.

For the meaning of parameters @code{small} and @code{verbosity},
see @code{bzDecompressInit}.

Because the compression ratio of the compressed data cannot be known in
advance, there is no easy way to guarantee that the output buffer will
be big enough.  You may of course make arrangements in your code to
record the size of the uncompressed data, but such a mechanism is beyond
the scope of this library.

@code{bzBuffToBuffDecompress} will not write data at or
beyond @code{dest[*destLen]}, even in case of buffer overflow.

Possible return values:
@display
      @code{BZ_PARAM_ERROR} 
         if @code{dest} is @code{NULL} or @code{destLen} is @code{NULL}
         or @code{small != 0 && small != 1}
         or @code{verbosity < 0} or @code{verbosity > 4} 
      @code{BZ_MEM_ERROR}
         if insufficient memory is available 
      @code{BZ_OUTBUFF_FULL}
         if the size of the compressed data exceeds @code{*destLen}
      @code{BZ_DATA_ERROR}
         if a data integrity error was detected in the compressed data
      @code{BZ_DATA_ERROR_MAGIC}
         if the compressed data doesn't begin with the right magic bytes
      @code{BZ_UNEXPECTED_EOF}
         if the compressed data ends unexpectedly
      @code{BZ_OK} 
         otherwise
@end display



@section Using the library in a @code{stdio}-free environment

@subsection Getting rid of @code{stdio}

In a deeply embedded application, you might want to use just
the memory-to-memory functions.  You can do this conveniently
by compiling the library with preprocessor symbol @code{BZ_NO_STDIO}
defined.  Doing this gives you a library containing only the following
eight functions:

@code{bzCompressInit}, @code{bzCompress}, @code{bzCompressEnd} @*
@code{bzDecompressInit}, @code{bzDecompress}, @code{bzDecompressEnd} @*
@code{bzBuffToBuffCompress}, @code{bzBuffToBuffDecompress}

When compiled like this, all functions will ignore @code{verbosity}
settings.

@subsection Critical error handling
@code{libbzip2} contains a number of internal assertion checks which
should, needless to say, never be activated.  Nevertheless, if an
assertion should fail, behaviour depends on whether or not the library
was compiled with @code{BZ_NO_STDIO} set.

For a normal compile, an assertion failure yields the message
@example
   bzip2/libbzip2, v0.9.0: internal error number N.
   This is a bug in bzip2/libbzip2, v0.9.0.  Please report
   it to me at: jseward@@acm.org.  If this happened when
   you were using some program which uses libbzip2 as a
   component, you should also report this bug to the author(s)
   of that program.  Please make an effort to report this bug;
   timely and accurate bug reports eventually lead to higher
   quality software.  Thx.  Julian Seward, 27 June 1998.
@end example
where @code{N} is some error code number.  @code{exit(3)}
is then called.

For a @code{stdio}-free library, assertion failures result
in a call to a function declared as:
@example
   extern void bz_internal_error ( int errcode );
@end example
The relevant code is passed as a parameter.  You should supply
such a function.

In either case, once an assertion failure has occurred, any 
@code{bz_stream} records involved can be regarded as invalid.
You should not attempt to resume normal operation with them.

You may, of course, change critical error handling to suit
your needs.  As I said above, critical errors indicate bugs
in the library and should not occur.  All "normal" error
situations are indicated via error return codes from functions,
and can be recovered from.


@section Making a Windows DLL
Everything related to Windows has been contributed by Yoshioka Tsuneo
@* (@code{QWF00133@@niftyserve.or.jp} /
@code{tsuneo-y@@is.aist-nara.ac.jp}), so you should send your queries to
him (but perhaps Cc: me, @code{jseward@@acm.org}).

My vague understanding of what to do is: using Visual C++ 5.0,
open the project file @code{libbz2.dsp}, and build.  That's all.

If you can't
open the project file for some reason, make a new one, naming these files:
@code{blocksort.c}, @code{bzlib.c}, @code{compress.c}, 
@code{crctable.c}, @code{decompress.c}, @code{huffman.c}, @*
@code{randtable.c} and @code{libbz2.def}.  You might also need
to name the header files @code{bzlib.h} and @code{bzlib_private.h}.

If you don't use VC++, you may need to define the proprocessor symbol
@code{_WIN32}. 

Finally, @code{dlltest.c} is a sample program using the DLL.  It has a
project file, @code{dlltest.dsp}.

I haven't tried any of this stuff myself, but it all looks plausible.



@chapter Miscellanea

These are just some random thoughts of mine.  Your mileage may
vary.

@section Limitations of the compressed file format
@code{bzip2-0.9.0} uses exactly the same file format as the previous
version, @code{bzip2-0.1}.  This decision was made in the interests of
stability.  Creating yet another incompatible compressed file format
would create further confusion and disruption for users.

Nevertheless, this is not a painless decision.  Development
work since the release of @code{bzip2-0.1} in August 1997
has shown complexities in the file format which slow down
decompression and, in retrospect, are unnecessary.  These are:
@itemize @bullet
@item The run-length encoder, which is the first of the 
      compression transformations, is entirely irrelevant.
      The original purpose was to protect the sorting algorithm
      from the very worst case input: a string of repeated
      symbols.  But algorithm steps Q6a and Q6b in the original
      Burrows-Wheeler technical report (SRC-124) show how
      repeats can be handled without difficulty in block
      sorting.
@item The randomisation mechanism doesn't really need to be
      there.  Udi Manber and Gene Myers published a suffix
      array construction algorithm a few years back, which
      can be employed to sort any block, no matter how 
      repetitive, in O(N log N) time.  Subsequent work by
      Kunihiko Sadakane has produced a derivative O(N (log N)^2) 
      algorithm which usually outperforms the Manber-Myers
      algorithm.

      I could have changed to Sadakane's algorithm, but I find
      it to be slower than @code{bzip2}'s existing algorithm for
      most inputs, and the randomisation mechanism protects
      adequately against bad cases.  I didn't think it was
      a good tradeoff to make.  Partly this is due to the fact
      that I was not flooded with email complaints about
      @code{bzip2-0.1}'s performance on repetitive data, so
      perhaps it isn't a problem for real inputs.

      Probably the best long-term solution
      is to use the existing sorting
      algorithm initially, and fall back to a O(N (log N)^2)
      algorithm if the standard algorithm gets into difficulties.
      This can be done without much difficulty; I made
      a prototype implementation of it some months now.
@item The compressed file format was never designed to be
      handled by a library, and I have had to jump though
      some hoops to produce an efficient implementation of
      decompression.  It's a bit hairy.  Try passing
      @code{decompress.c} through the C preprocessor 
      and you'll see what I mean.  Much of this complexity
      could have been avoided if the compressed size of
      each block of data was recorded in the data stream.
@item An Adler-32 checksum, rather than a CRC32 checksum,
      would be faster to compute.
@end itemize
It would be fair to say that the @code{bzip2} format was frozen
before I properly and fully understood the performance
consequences of doing so.

Improvements which I have been able to incorporate into
0.9.0, despite using the same file format, are:
@itemize @bullet
@item Single array implementation of the inverse BWT.  This
      significantly speeds up decompression, presumably
      because it reduces the number of cache misses.
@item Faster inverse MTF transform for large MTF values.  The
      new implementation is based on the notion of sliding blocks
      of values.
@item @code{bzip2-0.9.0} now reads and writes files with @code{fread}
      and @code{fwrite}; version 0.1 used @code{putc} and @code{getc}.
      Duh! I'm embarrassed at my own moronicness (moronicity?) on this
      one.

@end itemize
Further ahead, it would be nice 
to be able to do random access into files.  This will 
require some careful design of compressed file formats.



@section Portability issues
After some consideration, I have decided not to use
GNU @code{autoconf} to configure 0.9.0.

@code{autoconf}, admirable and wonderful though it is, 
mainly assists with portability problems between Unix-like
platforms.  But @code{bzip2} doesn't have much in the way
of portability problems on Unix; most of the difficulties appear
when porting to the Mac, or to Microsoft's operating systems.
@code{autoconf} doesn't help in those cases, and brings in a 
whole load of new complexity.

Most people should be able to compile the library and program
under Unix straight out-of-the-box, so to speak, especially 
if you have a version of GNU C available.

There are a couple of @code{__inline__} directives in the code.  GNU C
(@code{gcc}) should be able to handle them.  If your compiler doesn't
like them, just @code{#define} @code{__inline__} to be null.  One
easy way to do this is to compile with the flag @code{-D__inline__=}, 
which should be understood by most Unix compilers.

If you still have difficulties, try compiling with the macro
@code{BZ_STRICT_ANSI} defined.  This should enable you to build the
library in a strictly ANSI compliant environment.  Building the program
itself like this is dangerous and not supported, since you remove
@code{bzip2}'s checks against compressing directories, symbolic links,
devices, and other not-really-a-file entities.  This could cause
filesystem corruption!

One other thing: if you create a @code{bzip2} binary for public
distribution, please try and link it statically (@code{gcc -s}).  This
avoids all sorts of library-version issues that others may encounter
later on.


@section Reporting bugs
I tried pretty hard to make sure @code{bzip2} is
bug free, both by design and by testing.  Hopefully
you'll never need to read this section for real.

Nevertheless, if @code{bzip2} dies with a segmentation
fault, a bus error or an internal assertion failure, it
will ask you to email me a bug report.  Experience with
version 0.1 shows that almost all these problems can
be traced to either compiler bugs or hardware problems.
@itemize @bullet
@item
Recompile the program with no optimisation, and see if it
works.  And/or try a different compiler.
I heard all sorts of stories about various flavours
of GNU C (and other compilers) generating bad code for
@code{bzip2}, and I've run across two such examples myself.

2.7.X versions of GNU C are known to generate bad code from
time to time, at high optimisation levels.  
If you get problems, try using the flags
@code{-O2} @code{-fomit-frame-pointer} @code{-fno-strength-reduce}.
You should specifically @emph{not} use @code{-funroll-loops}.

You may notice that the Makefile runs four tests as part of
the build process.  If the program passes all of these, it's
a pretty good (but not 100%) indication that the compiler has
done its job correctly.
@item
If @code{bzip2} crashes randomly, and the crashes are not
repeatable, you may have a flaky memory subsystem.  @code{bzip2}
really hammers your memory hierarchy, and if it's a bit marginal,
you may get these problems.  Ditto if your disk or I/O subsystem
is slowly failing.  Yup, this really does happen.

Try using a different machine of the same type, and see if
you can repeat the problem.
@item This isn't really a bug, but ... If @code{bzip2} tells
you your file is corrupted on decompression, and you
obtained the file via FTP, there is a possibility that you
forgot to tell FTP to do a binary mode transfer.  That absolutely
will cause the file to be non-decompressible.  You'll have to transfer
it again.
@end itemize

If you've incorporated @code{libbzip2} into your own program
and are getting problems, please, please, please, check that the 
parameters you are passing in calls to the library, are
correct, and in accordance with what the documentation says
is allowable.  I have tried to make the library robust against
such problems, but I'm sure I haven't succeeded.

Finally, if the above comments don't help, you'll have to send
me a bug report.  Now, it's just amazing how many people will 
send me a bug report saying something like
@display
   bzip2 crashed with segmentation fault on my machine
@end display
and absolutely nothing else.  Needless to say, a such a report
is @emph{totally, utterly, completely and comprehensively 100% useless; 
a waste of your time, my time, and net bandwidth}.
With no details at all, there's no way I can possibly begin
to figure out what the problem is.

The rules of the game are: facts, facts, facts.  Don't omit
them because "oh, they won't be relevant".  At the bare 
minimum:
@display
   Machine type.  Operating system version.  
   Exact version of @code{bzip2} (do @code{bzip2 -V}).  
   Exact version of the compiler used.  
   Flags passed to the compiler.
@end display
However, the most important single thing that will help me is
the file that you were trying to compress or decompress at the
time the problem happened.  Without that, my ability to do anything
more than speculate about the cause, is limited.

Please remember that I connect to the Internet with a modem, so
you should contact me before mailing me huge files.


@section Did you get the right package?

@code{bzip2} is a resource hog.  It soaks up large amounts of CPU cycles
and memory.  Also, it gives very large latencies.  In the worst case, you
can feed many megabytes of uncompressed data into the library before
getting any compressed output, so this probably rules out applications
requiring interactive behaviour.

These aren't faults of my implementation, I hope, but more
an intrinsic property of the Burrows-Wheeler transform (unfortunately).  
Maybe this isn't what you want.

If you want a compressor and/or library which is faster, uses less
memory but gets pretty good compression, and has minimal latency,
consider Jean-loup
Gailly's and Mark Adler's work, @code{zlib-1.1.2} and
@code{gzip-1.2.4}.  Look for them at
@code{http://www.cdrom.com/pub/infozip/zlib} and
@code{http://www.gzip.org} respectively.

For something faster and lighter still, you might try Markus F X J
Oberhumer's @code{LZO} real-time compression/decompression library, at
@* @code{http://wildsau.idv.uni-linz.ac.at/mfx/lzo.html}.

If you want to use the @code{bzip2} algorithms to compress small blocks
of data, 64k bytes or smaller, for example on an on-the-fly disk
compressor, you'd be well advised not to use this library.  Instead,
I've made a special library tuned for that kind of use.  It's part of
@code{e2compr-0.40}, an on-the-fly disk compressor for the Linux
@code{ext2} filesystem.  Look at
@code{http://www.netspace.net.au/~reiter/e2compr}.



@section Testing

A record of the tests I've done.

First, some data sets:
@itemize @bullet
@item B: a directory containing a 6001 files, one for every length in the
      range 0 to 6000 bytes.  The files contain random lowercase
      letters.  18.7 megabytes.
@item H: my home directory tree.  Documents, source code, mail files,
      compressed data.  H contains B, and also a directory of 
      files designed as boundary cases for the sorting; mostly very
      repetitive, nasty files.  445 megabytes.
@item A: directory tree holding various applications built from source:
      @code{egcs-1.0.2}, @code{gcc-2.8.1}, KDE Beta 4, GTK, Octave, etc.
      827 megabytes.
@item P: directory tree holding large amounts of source code (@code{.tar} 
      files) of the entire GNU distribution, plus a couple of
      Linux distributions.  2400 megabytes.
@end itemize
The tests conducted are as follows.  Each test means compressing 
(a copy of) each file in the data set, decompressing it and
comparing it against the original.

First, a bunch of tests with block sizes, internal buffer
sizes and randomisation lengths set very small, 
to detect any problems with the
blocking, buffering and randomisation mechanisms.  
This required modifying the source code so as to try to 
break it.
@enumerate
@item Data set H, with
      buffer size of 1 byte, and block size of 23 bytes.
@item Data set B, buffer sizes 1 byte, block size 1 byte.
@item As (2) but small-mode decompression (first 1700 files).
@item As (2) with block size 2 bytes.
@item As (2) with block size 3 bytes.
@item As (2) with block size 4 bytes.
@item As (2) with block size 5 bytes.
@item As (2) with block size 6 bytes and small-mode decompression.
@item H with normal buffer sizes (5000 bytes), normal block
      size (up to 900000 bytes), but with randomisation
      mechanism running intensely (randomising approximately every
      third byte).
@item As (9) with small-mode decompression.
@end enumerate
Then some tests with unmodified source code.
@enumerate
@item H, all settings normal.
@item As (1), with small-mode decompress.
@item H, compress with flag @code{-1}.
@item H, compress with flag @code{-s}, decompress with flag @code{-s}.
@item Forwards compatibility: H, @code{bzip2-0.1pl2} compressing,
      @code{bzip2-0.9.0} decompressing, all settings normal.
@item Backwards compatibility:  H, @code{bzip2-0.9.0} compressing,
      @code{bzip2-0.1pl2} decompressing, all settings normal.
@item Bigger tests: A, all settings normal.
@item P, all settings normal.
@item Misc test: about 100 megabytes of @code{.tar} files with
      @code{bzip2} compiled with Purify.
@item Misc tests to make sure it builds and runs ok on non-Linux/x86
      platforms.
@end enumerate
These tests were conducted on a 205 MHz Cyrix 6x86MX machine, running
Linux 2.0.32.  They represent nearly a week of continuous computation.
All tests completed successfully.


@section Further reading
@code{bzip2} is not research work, in the sense that it doesn't present
any new ideas.  Rather, it's an engineering exercise based on existing
ideas.

Four documents describe essentially all the ideas behind @code{bzip2}:
@example
Michael Burrows and D. J. Wheeler:
  "A block-sorting lossless data compression algorithm"
   10th May 1994. 
   Digital SRC Research Report 124.
   ftp://ftp.digital.com/pub/DEC/SRC/research-reports/SRC-124.ps.gz
   If you have trouble finding it, try searching at the
   New Zealand Digital Library, http://www.nzdl.org.

Daniel S. Hirschberg and Debra A. LeLewer
  "Efficient Decoding of Prefix Codes"
   Communications of the ACM, April 1990, Vol 33, Number 4.
   You might be able to get an electronic copy of this
      from the ACM Digital Library.

David J. Wheeler
   Program bred3.c and accompanying document bred3.ps.
   This contains the idea behind the multi-table Huffman
   coding scheme.
   ftp://ftp.cl.cam.ac.uk/pub/user/djw3/

Jon L. Bentley and Robert Sedgewick
  "Fast Algorithms for Sorting and Searching Strings"
   Available from Sedgewick's web page,
   www.cs.princeton.edu/~rs
@end example
The following paper gives valuable additional insights into the
algorithm, but is not immediately the basis of any code
used in bzip2.
@example
Peter Fenwick:
   Block Sorting Text Compression
   Proceedings of the 19th Australasian Computer Science Conference,
     Melbourne, Australia.  Jan 31 - Feb 2, 1996.
   ftp://ftp.cs.auckland.ac.nz/pub/peter-f/ACSC96paper.ps
@end example
Kunihiko Sadakane's sorting algorithm, mentioned above,
is available from:
@example
http://naomi.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/~sada/papers/Sada98b.ps.gz
@end example
The Manber-Myers suffix array construction
algorithm is described in a paper
available from:
@example
http://www.cs.arizona.edu/people/gene/PAPERS/suffix.ps
@end example



@contents

@bye

