.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Jukka Andberg
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $NetBSD: amidisplaycc.4,v 1.16 2022/08/13 17:06:38 wiz Exp $
.Dd November 12, 2003
.Dt AMIDISPLAYCC 4 amiga
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm amidisplaycc
.Nd wscons interface to amiga custom chips drivers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd amidisplaycc0 at mainbus0
.Cd wsdisplay0 at amidisplaycc0
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This device acts as an adapter between the
.Xr wscons 4
framework and the Amiga custom chip driver functions.
It exports the internal
.Xr wsdisplay 4
interface and contains the necessary rendering functions to
operate a text terminal with virtual screens.
It uses the Amiga abstract graphic driver (grfabs) functions for
the low-level display management.
.Pp
It supports foreground and background color, and the hilite (bold),
underline, and reverse text attributes.
.Ss Virtual terminals and screen types
The number of virtual screens is limited only by
the available chip memory.
.Pp
Each virtual screen can have a different screen type.
A screen type defines the following things: height and width
in pixels, number of colors, and font size.
The supported screen types are listed below.
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
80x64 - display size 640x512 with 8 colors, font size 8x8
.It
80x51 - display size 640x510 with 8 colors, font size 8x10
.It
80x50 - display size 640x400 with 8 colors, font size 8x8
.It
80x40 - display size 640x400 with 8 colors, font size 8x10
.It
80x32 - display size 640x512 with 8 colors, font size 8x16
.It
80x31 - display size 640x248 with 8 colors, font size 8x8
.It
80x25 - display size 640x400 with 8 colors, font size 8x16
.It
80x24 - display size 640x192 with 8 colors, font size 8x8
.It
default - same as either 80x64 or 80x50, depending on the presence
of GRF_NTSC and GRF_PAL in the kernel configuration.
.El
.Pp
The grfabs code determines the actual screen mode that is used.
The config options GRF_NTSC, GRF_PAL, GRF_AGA, etc. determine
what kind of chipsets/modes are available.
.Ss Fonts
Fonts of width 8 and any height are supported.
Fonts can be compiled into the kernel by specifying "options FONT_[fontname]"
in the configuration file, or loaded with the
.Xr wsfontload 8
utility runtime.
.Ss X11
The X11 server works using the
.Xr wsfb 4
driver.
The driver supports 256 color and monochrome modes.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4 ,
.Xr wsfontload 8 ,
.Xr wsfont 9
