.\"	$NetBSD: grfcv3d.4,v 1.6.22.1 2013/01/16 05:32:36 yamt Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 9, 2012
.Dt GRFCV3D 4 amiga
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm grfcv3d
.Nd 8/15/16/24/32-bit color graphics driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "grfcv3d0 at zbus0"
.Cd "grf7 at grfcv3d0"
.Cd "ite7 at grf7"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at grf7"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports graphics boards with the S3 Virge chipset.
It supports the minimal ioctl's needed to run X11.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
interface supports the following ZorroII/III expansion card:
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxxxxxxnxxxxxx" -offset indent
.It Em CyberVision 64/3D
A Zorro II/III card.
From phase5, manufacturer 8512, product 67.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "xxxxxxxxxx" -compact
.It Pa /dev/grf7
graphics interface special file
.It Pa /dev/ttye7
console interface special file for the internal terminal emulator
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr console 4 ,
.Xr grfcv 4 ,
.Xr ite 4 ,
.Xr grfconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
interface first appeared in
.Nx 1.3 .
It was modified for
.Nx 6.0
to support
.Xr wsdisplay 4
interface.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Tobias Abt
based on
.Xr grfcv 4
driver.
.An Bernd Ernesti .
fixed multipie bugs and later maintained the driver.
The
.Xr wsdisplay 4
interface was added by
.An Frank Wille
and
.An Radoslaw Kujawa .
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
does not support the sync-on-green flag from
.Xr grfconfig 8 .
.Pp
The
.Xr wsdisplay 4
interface does not support all functionality provided by the driver and it can
not be used at the same time as
.Xr ite 4 .
X11 is not supported with
.Xr wsdisplay 4 .
It needs more testing.
