.\" $NetBSD: p5membar.4,v 1.2.8.1 2014/08/20 00:02:35 tls Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Radoslaw Kujawa.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 10, 2012
.Dt P5MEMBAR 4 amiga
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm p5membar
.Nd Phase5 PCI bridge memory space driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "p5membar* at zbus0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for automatically configured Phase5 PCI bridge
resources.
It is needed for proper operation of the
.Xr p5pb 4
when G-REX firmware is running on processor board, and Phase5 PCI hardware is
present in the machine.
Known firmware versions automatically allocationg these resources include 44.69
and 44.71.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr p5pb 4 ,
.Xr pci 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device first appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Radoslaw Kujawa Aq Mt radoslaw.kujawa@gmail.com .
