.\" $NetBSD: p5pb.4,v 1.3 2011/10/07 08:46:34 rkujawa Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Radoslaw Kujawa.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 26, 2011
.Dt P5PB 4 amiga
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm p5pb
.Nd Phase5 PCI bridge driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "p5pb0 at zbus0"
.Cd "pci* at p5pb?"
.Cd "genfb* at pci?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the PCI bus present on BlizzardVisionPPC, 
CyberVisionPPC and CybrerVision 64/3D graphics cards.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following hardware:
.Bl -tag -width "BLIZZARDVISIONPPC" -offset indent
.It Em BLIZZARDVISIONPPC
Phase5 BlizzardVisionPPC graphics card.
.It Em CYBERVISIONPPC
Phase5 CyberVisionPPC graphics card.
.It Em CYBERVISION 64/3D
Phase5 CyberVision 64/3D graphics card.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr genfb 4 ,
.Xr grfcv3d 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 
.\" .Xr pm2fb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device first appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Radoslaw Kujawa Aq radoslaw.kujawa@gmail.com .
.Sh BUGS
Current version of this driver depends on PCI bus setup and enumeration
done by the firmware.
.Pp
The driver will not attach at all, if there is no AutoConfig entry
for CVPPC/BVPPC card (Zorro product ID 110).
Some firmware revisions are known not to create this entry.
.Pp
It is not (yet) possible to use the CVPPC/BVPPC as a console.
.Sh CAVEATS
G-REX PCI bridge is currently not supported, however the driver will try to attach to it, because it has the same vendor and product ID as CVPPC/BVPPC cards. Due to similarities between these products, it may even detect the card inserted into first slot, but the driver will (most likely) not work properly.
.Pp
Support for CV64/3D is disabled by default, since the 
.Xr grfcv3d 4
driver does attach directly to 
.Xr zbus 4 . 
Machine independent PCI driver for S3 ViRGE does not exist yet.
