.\" $NetBSD: wdsc.4,v 1.2 2001/06/05 12:30:47 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Steve C. Woodford.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 28, 1999
.Os
.Dt WDSC 4 mvme68k
.Sh NAME
.Nm wdsc
.Nd Western Digital WD33c93 SCSI Bus Interface Controller
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "wdsc0 at pcc? ipl 2"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides an abstraction layer between the SCSI hardware
fitted to the
.Tn Motorola
MVME147 single board computer (WD33C93), and the machine
independent SCSI drivers described in
.Xr scsibus 4 .
.Pp
In addition to sending the required SCSI commands to
target devices on the SCSI bus, the
.Nm
driver deals with DMA, device interrupts, sync/async negotiation
and target disconnects/reconnects.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Too many to mention!
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr scsibus 4 ,
.Xr pcc 4
.Sh BUGS
Negotiation of Synchronous SCSI data transfers has been
deliberately disabled in the MVME147's
.Nm
driver as it has proved extremely difficult to make it
work reliably in this mode.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver does not respond well to exceptional conditions
caused by poor SCSI cabling and/or termination. In those
instances the machine is likely to require a hard reset
to recover.
.Pp
The current
.Nm
driver should be blown away and replaced with a machine independent
version.
