.\" $NetBSD: compat_30.8,v 1.1 2006/05/18 17:08:04 chap Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from a document contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Chapman Flack.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd May 11, 2006
.Dt COMPAT_30 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm compat_30
.Nd setup procedure for backward compatibility on post-3.0 release
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "options COMPAT_30"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
module allows
.Nx
to run
.Nx 3.0
executables.
.Pp
The support is present if the kernel was built with option
.Dv COMPAT_30 .
It is not available as a loadable module.
.Pp
Static executables typically need no additional setup.
Dynamic binaries may require shared libraries whose major version
number changed since
.Nx 3.0 ,
which are listed below.
A shadow directory under
.Pa /emul
is not used; the libraries can be obtained from a
.Nx 3.0
distribution and installed in the usual directories,
as the major version number in the file name will prevent conflicts.
If an upgrade installation from
.Nx 3.0
has been done and these libraries are still present, nothing more need
be done.
.Ss Libraries needed from 3.0
.Bl -item
.It
.Pa /lib/libcrypto.so.2.1
.Pa /lib/libcrypto.so.2
.It
.Pa /lib/libevent.so.0.2
.Pa /lib/libevent.so.0
.It
.Pa /usr/lib/libkafs.so.6.0
.Pa /usr/lib/libkafs.so.6
.It
.Pa /usr/lib/libkrb5.so.19.1
.Pa /usr/lib/libkrb5.so.19
.It
.Pa /lib/libradius.so.0.0
.Pa /lib/libradius.so.0
.It
.Pa /usr/lib/libssh.so.1.0
.Pa /usr/lib/libssh.so.1
.It
.Pa /usr/lib/libssl.so.3.0
.Pa /usr/lib/libssl.so.3
.\" .It
.\" .Pa libtelnet lives where?
.It
.Pa /lib/libz.so.0.4
.Pa /lib/libz.so.0
.It
.Pa /usr/lib/libamu.so.2.1
.Pa /usr/lib/libamu.so.2
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.Dv COMPAT_30
enables the
.Nx 3.0
versions of the following system calls, whose syscall numbers and
argument structures were changed after the 3.0 release to accommodate
64-bit filesystems:
.Xr fhstat 2 ,
.Xr fstat 2 ,
.Xr getdents 2 ,
.Xr lstat 2 ,
.Xr stat 2 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr config 1 ,
.Xr fhstat 2 ,
.Xr fstat 2 ,
.Xr getdents 2 ,
.Xr lstat 2 ,
.Xr stat 2 ,
.Xr options 4
.Sh HISTORY
.Nx
offers back-compatibility options back to
.Nx 0.9 ,
but the first to be documented with a manual page is
.Nm .
.Sh BUGS
The compatible
.Xr getdents 2
is unable to see directory entries beneath the top layer of a union,
even though the real 3.0
.Fn getdents
did not have that problem.
.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
Programs with security impact that receive incorrect directory contents
from
.Fn getdents
may behave improperly, as when they are unable to find, or find the wrong
versions of, important files.
