.\"	$NetBSD: yp.8,v 1.14.4.1 1999/12/27 18:31:04 wrstuden Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992/3 Theo de Raadt <deraadt@fsa.ca>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1994 Jason R. Thorpe.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS
.\" OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 16, 1999
.Dt YP 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nis ,
.Nm yp
.Nd description of the NIS (formerly YP) subsystem
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ypbind
.Op Fl ypset
.Nm ypbind
.Op Fl ypsetme
.Pp
.Nm ypset
.Op Fl h Ar host
.Op Fl d Ar domain
.Ar server
.Pp
.Nm yppoll
.Op Fl h Ar host
.Op Fl d Ar domain
.Ar mapname
.Pp
.Nm ypcat
.Op Fl kt
.Op Fl d Ar domainname
.Ar mapname
.Nm ypcat
.Fl x
.Pp
.Nm ypmatch
.Op Fl kt
.Op Fl d Ar domainname
.Ar key ... mapname
.Nm ypmatch
.Fl x
.Pp
.Nm ypwhich
.Op Fl d Ar domain
.Oo
.Op Fl t
.Fl m Op Ar mname
|
.Ar host
.Oc
.Nm ypwhich
.Fl x
.Pp
.Nm ypserv
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl x
.Pp
.Nm yppush
.Op Fl d Ar domainname
.Op Fl h Ar hostname
.Op Fl v
.Ar mapname
.Pp
.Nm ypxfr
.Op Fl bcf
.Op Fl d Ar domain
.Op Fl h Ar host
.Op Fl s Ar domain
.Op Fl C Ar tid prog ipadd port
.Ar mapname
.Pp
.Nm ypinit
.Fl m
.Op Ar domainname
.Nm ypinit
.Fl s
.Ar master_server
.Op Ar domainname
.Pp
.Nm yptest
.Pp
.Nm rpc.yppasswdd
.Op Fl -noshell
.Op Fl -nogecos
.Op Fl -nopw
.Op Fl m Ar arg1 arg2 ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Tn NIS
subsystem allows network management of passwd and group file
entries through the functions
.Xr getpwent 3
and
.Xr getgrent 3 .
.Tn NIS
also provides hooks for other client programs, such as
.Xr amd 8
and
.Xr bootparamd 8 ,
that can use
.Tn NIS
maps.
.Pp
The
.Tn NIS 
subsystem is conditionally started in
.Pa /etc/rc .
See the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file for configuration variables.
.Sh BUGS
If
.Xr ypbind
cannot find a server, the system behaves the same way as Sun's code:
it hangs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr domainname 1 ,
.Xr ypcat 1 ,
.Xr ypmatch 1 ,
.Xr group 5 ,
.Xr hosts_access 5 ,
.Xr nsswitch.conf 5 ,
.Xr passwd 5 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.conf 5 ,
.Xr ypbind 8 ,
.Xr yppoll 8 , 
.Xr ypset 8 ,
.Xr ypwhich 1 ,
.Xr ypserv 8 ,
.Xr yppush 8 ,
.Xr ypxfr 8 ,
.Xr ypinit 8 ,
.Xr yptest 8 ,
.Xr ypclnt 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Tn NIS
client subsystem was originally written by Theo de Raadt
to be compatible with Sun's implementation.  The
.Tn NIS
server suite was originally written by Mats O Jansson.
