.\"	$NetBSD: autoconf.4,v 1.1 2022/06/12 03:51:13 tsutsui Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)autoconf.4	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/9/93
.\"
.Dd June 12, 2022
.Dt AUTOCONF 4 luna68k
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm autoconf
.Nd diagnostics from the autoconfiguration code
.Sh DESCRIPTION
When
.Nx
bootstraps it probes the innards of the machine
on which it is running
and locates controllers, drives, and other devices, printing out
what it finds on the console.  This procedure is driven by a system
configuration table which is processed by
.Xr config 1
and compiled into each kernel.
.Pp
Normally, the system uses the disk from which it was loaded as the root
filesystem.
If that is not possible,
or if such a system is booted with the
.Dv RB_ASKNAME
option (see
.Xr reboot 2 ) ,
then the name of the root device is read from the console terminal at boot
time, and any available device may be used.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It unknown CPU type
You tried to boot
.Nx
on a
.Tn CPU
type which it doesn't
(or at least this compiled version of
.Nx
doesn't) understand.
.Pp
.It %s%d at mainbus0
.It %s%d: %s
An on-board device controller was found.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr config 1 ,
.Xr hp300/intro 4
