.\" $NetBSD: bintime_add.9,v 1.2 2010/06/08 07:20:20 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Jukka Ruohonen.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd June 8, 2010
.Dt BINTIME_ADD 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bintime_add
.Nd operations on
.Dq bintime
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/time.h
.Ft vid
.Fn bintime_add "struct bintime *bt" "const struct bintime *bt2"
.Ft void
.Fn bintime_addx "struct bintime *bt" "uint64_t x"
.Ft void
.Fn bintime_sub "struct bintime *bt" "const struct bintime *bt2"
.Ft void
.Fn bintime2timespec "const struct bintime *bt" "struct timespec *ts"
.Ft void
.Fn timespec2bintime "const struct timespec *ts" "struct bintime *bt"
.Ft void
.Fn bintime2timeval "const struct bintime *bt" "struct timeval *tv"
.Ft void
.Fn timeval2bintime "const struct timeval *tv" "struct bintime *bt"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions are provided for convenience as part of the machine-independent
.Xr timecounter 9
framework.
All of them operate with the
.Em bintime
structure.
.Pp
The function
.Fn bintime_add
adds the time information stored in
.Fa bt2
to
.Fa bt .
Conversely,
.Fn bintime_sub
subtracts
.Fa bt2
from
.Fa bt .
The
.Fn bintime_addx
function stores the fraction of a second
.Fa x
to
.Fa bt .
.Pp
Like the function names bespeak,
.Fn bintime2timespec
converts the
.Em bintime
structure to
.Em struct timespec
and
.Fn timespec2bintime
does the opposite.
The functions
.Fn bintime2timeval
and
.Fn timeval2bintime
operate with
.Em struct timeval
instead.
The result is stored to the right-hand side.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr timeradd 3 ,
.Xr timeval 3 ,
.Xr bintime 9 ,
.Xr timecounter 9
