.\"	$NetBSD: byteorder.9,v 1.11 2017/10/16 15:48:14 christos Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Mike Barcroft <mike@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: src/share/man/man9/byteorder.9,v 1.6 2003/05/21 17:32:55 ru Exp $
.\"
.Dd October 16, 2017
.Dt BYTEORDER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bswap16 ,
.Nm bswap32 ,
.Nm bswap64 ,
.Nm be16toh ,
.Nm be32toh ,
.Nm be64toh ,
.Nm htobe16 ,
.Nm htobe32 ,
.Nm htobe64 ,
.Nm htole16 ,
.Nm htole32 ,
.Nm htole64 ,
.Nm le16toh ,
.Nm le32toh ,
.Nm le64toh ,
.Nm be16enc ,
.Nm be16dec ,
.Nm be32enc ,
.Nm be32dec ,
.Nm be64enc ,
.Nm be64dec ,
.Nm le16enc ,
.Nm le16dec ,
.Nm le32enc ,
.Nm le32dec ,
.Nm le64enc ,
.Nm le64dec
.Nd byte order operations
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/endian.h
.Ft uint16_t
.Fn bswap16 "uint16_t int16"
.Ft uint32_t
.Fn bswap32 "uint32_t int32"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn bswap64 "uint64_t int64"
.Ft uint16_t
.Fn be16toh "uint16_t big16"
.Ft uint32_t
.Fn be32toh "uint32_t big32"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn be64toh "uint64_t big64"
.Ft uint16_t
.Fn htobe16 "uint16_t host16"
.Ft uint32_t
.Fn htobe32 "uint32_t host32"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn htobe64 "uint64_t host64"
.Ft uint16_t
.Fn htole16 "uint16_t host16"
.Ft uint32_t
.Fn htole32 "uint32_t host32"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn htole64 "uint64_t host64"
.Ft uint16_t
.Fn le16toh "uint16_t little16"
.Ft uint32_t
.Fn le32toh "uint32_t little32"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn le64toh "uint64_t little64"
.Ft uint16_t
.Fn be16dec "const void *stream"
.Ft uint32_t
.Fn be32dec "const void *stream"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn be64dec "const void *stream"
.Ft uint16_t
.Fn le16dec "const void *stream"
.Ft uint32_t
.Fn le32dec "const void *stream"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn le64dec "const void *stream"
.Ft void
.Fn be16enc "void *stream" "uint16_t host16"
.Ft void
.Fn be32enc "void *stream" "uint32_t host32"
.Ft void
.Fn be64enc "void *stream" "uint64_t host64"
.Ft void
.Fn le16enc "void *stream" "uint16_t host16"
.Ft void
.Fn le32enc "void *stream" "uint32_t host32"
.Ft void
.Fn le64enc "void *stream" "uint64_t host64"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn bswap16 ,
.Fn bswap32 ,
and
.Fn bswap64
functions return a byte order swapped integer.
On big endian systems, the number is converted to little endian byte order.
On little endian systems, the number is converted to big endian byte order.
.Pp
The
.Fn be16toh ,
.Fn be32toh ,
and
.Fn be64toh
functions return a big endian byte ordered integer
converted to the system's native byte order.
The return value will be the same as the argument on big endian systems.
.Pp
The
.Fn le16toh ,
.Fn le32toh ,
and
.Fn le64toh
functions return a little endian byte ordered integer
converted to the system's native byte order.
The return value will be the same as the argument on little endian systems.
.Pp
The
.Fn htobe16 ,
.Fn htobe32 ,
and
.Fn htobe64
functions return an integer in the system's native
byte order converted to big endian byte order.
The return value will be the same as the argument on big endian systems.
.Pp
The
.Fn htole16 ,
.Fn htole32 ,
and
.Fn htole64
functions return an integer in the system's native
byte order converted to little endian byte order.
The return value will be the same as the argument on little endian systems.
.Pp
The
.Fn be16enc ,
.Fn be16dec ,
.Fn be32enc ,
.Fn be32dec ,
.Fn be64enc ,
.Fn be64dec ,
.Fn le16enc ,
.Fn le16dec ,
.Fn le32enc ,
.Fn le32dec ,
.Fn le64enc ,
and
.Fn le64dec
functions encode and decode integers to/from octet stream
on any alignment in big/little endian format.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bswap 3 ,
.Xr byteorder 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn hto*
and
.Fn *toh
functions first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
These were later ported to
.Fx 5.0 .
These functions were originally introduced to handle PCI bus master
devices that (via DMA) transfer little endian data even on big
endian systems.
.Pp
The encode/decode functions first appeared in
.Fx 5.1 .
These were later ported to
.Nx 3.0
as a part of the
.Xr uuidgen 2
support.
