.\" $NetBSD: crashme.9,v 1.6 2024/07/24 12:48:17 uwe Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Matthew R. Green
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 7, 2019
.Dt CRASHME 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm crashme ,
.Nm crashme_add ,
.Nm crashme_remove
.Nd in-kernel testing of crash handling
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/crashme.h
.Ft int
.Fn crashme_add "crashme_node *cn"
.Ft int
.Fn crashme_remove "crashme_node *cn"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
functions provide access to dynamically add and remove crashme nodes.
These nodes are simply named callbacks that are expected to cause the
system to crash.
.Pp
The crashme functionality is only available in kernels with the
.Ic options DEBUG
set in the kernel
.Xr config 5
file.
.Pp
Each crashme node is maintained in a
.Vt crashme_node
structure which has the following public members:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef int (*crashme_fn)(int /* flags */);

typedef struct crashme_node {
        const char     *cn_name;
        const char     *cn_longname;
        crashme_fn      cn_fn;
} crashme_node;
.Ed
.Pp
The
caller must fill in the
.Fa cn_name ,
.Fa cn_longname ,
and
.Fa cn_fn
members.
.Pp
The
.Fa cn_fn
function is passed
.Ar flags
parameter from sysctl.
It shall return 0 upon success or non zero on failure.
.Sh SYSCTL SUPPORT
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are provided by the
.Nm
subsystem:
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width Va
.It Va debug.crashme_enable
Must be set to 1 for any
.Nm
node to be executed.
.El
.Pp
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables trigger crashes in different ways when written to:
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width Va
.It Va debug.crashme.panic
Call
.Xr panic 9 .
.It Va debug.crashme.null_deref
Dereference a null pointer.
.It Va debug.crashme.null_jump
Call a null function pointer, i.e., jump to the instruction address
zero.
.It Va debug.crashme.ddb
Enter
.Xr ddb 4
directly by calling
.Fn Debugger .
Requires
.Ic options DDB .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ddb 4 ,
.Xr options 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr panic 9 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Nx 9.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Matthew R. Green
