.\"     $NetBSD: cred.9,v 1.4 2003/01/25 19:27:43 kleink Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Gregory McGarry.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 25, 2003
.Dt CRED 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cred ,
.Nm crcopy ,
.Nm crcvt
.Nm crdup ,
.Nm crfree ,
.Nm crget ,
.Nm crhold ,
.Nd operations on user credentials
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include \*[Lt]sys/param.h\*[Gt]
.Fd #include \*[Lt]sys/ucred.h\*[Gt]
.Ft struct ucred *
.Fn crcopy "struct ucred *cr"
.Ft void
.Fn crcvt "struct ucred *cr" "const struct uucred *ucr"
.Ft struct ucred *
.Fn crdup "struct ucred *cr"
.Ft void
.Fn crfree "struct ucred *cr"
.Ft struct ucred *
.Fn crget "void"
.Ft void
.Fn crhold "struct ucred *cr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A process must have the appropriate user credentials for the kernel to
perform an operation on its behalf.
The user credentials are stored along with the process in the following
structure:
.Pp
.Bd -literal
struct ucred {
        u_int32_t       cr_ref;                 /* reference count */
        uid_t           cr_uid;                 /* effective user id */
        gid_t           cr_gid;                 /* effective group id */
        u_int32_t       cr_ngroups;             /* number of groups */
        gid_t           cr_groups[NGROUPS];     /* groups */
};
.Ed
.Pp
User credentials are controlled by the
.Xr group 5
and
.Xr passwd 5
files and manipulated using the
.Xr setregid 2 ,
.Xr setgid 2 ,
.Xr setegid 2 ,
.Xr setgroups 2 ,
and
.Xr getgroups 2
system calls.
.Pp
References to user credentials are maintained from many different data
structures, including processes, file descriptors and vnodes.
The ucred member
.Em cr_ref
reflects the number of references to the credentials.
.Sh FUNCTIONS
The following functions operate on user credentials:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width compact
.It Fn crcopy "cr"
Allocate a new credentials structure and copy the contents from
credentials
.Fa cr
to the new one.
The old credentials
.Fa cr
are freed.
The reference count on the returned credentials is guaranteed to be one.
.It Fn crcvt "cr" "ucr"
Convert from userland credentials
.Fa ucr
to kernel credentials
.Fa cr .
.It Fn crdup "cr"
Allocate a new credentials structure and copy the contents from
credentials
.Fa cr
to the new one.
The old credentials
.Fa cr
remain unchanged.
The reference count on the returned credentials is guaranteed to be one.
.It Fn crfree "cr"
Decrement the reference count on credentials
.Fa cr .
If the reference count drops to zero, then the credentials are freed.
.It Fn crget "void"
Allocate and return zeroed credentials.
.It Fn crhold "cr"
Increment the reference count on credentials
.Fa cr .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr suser 9
.Sh BUGS
User credentials are sometimes allocated using
.Xr MALLOC 9
and sometimes using the
.Xr pool 9
facility.
This cannot be right.
