.\" $NetBSD: ctod.9,v 1.4 2011/04/08 07:55:04 jruoho Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Jukka Ruohonen.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 8, 2011
.Dt CTOD 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ctod
.Nd macros related to bytes, pages, and disk blocks
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.Ft size
.Fn ctod "size x"
.Ft size
.Fn dtoc "size x"
.Ft size
.Fn ctob "size x"
.Ft size
.Fn btoc "size x"
.Ft size
.Fn dbtob "size x"
.Ft size
.Fn btodb "size x"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
family of macros can be used to convert between bytes, pages
.Pq Dq clicks ,
and disk blocks.
.Pp
The following table lists the possible conversions:
.Bl -column -offset indent "disk blocks " "disk blocks " "disk blocks "
.It Sy Macro Ta Sy From Ta Sy To
.It Fn ctod Ta pages Ta disk blocks
.It Fn dtoc Ta disk blocks Ta pages
.It Fn ctob Ta pages Ta bytes
.It Fn btoc Ta bytes Ta pages
.It Fn dbtob Ta disk blocks Ta bytes
.It Fn btodb Ta bytes Ta disk blocks
.El
.Pp
These are typical macros that may appear
with different names in other operating systems.
Examples include
.Fn btop
and
.Fn btopr
in Solaris.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr param 3
.Sh HISTORY
Some of these macros appeared in
.At v7 .
.Sh CAVEATS
The described macros make no assumptions
about the type of the input parameter.
A caller should ensure that neither
integer overflow nor integer underflow are possible.
