.\"	$NetBSD: do_setresuid.9,v 1.4 2008/04/30 13:10:58 martin Exp $
.\"
.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by David Laight.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd September 28, 2003
.Dt DO_SETRESUID 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm do_setresuid ,
.Nm do_setresgid
.Nd set process uid and gid
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/ucred.h
.Ft int
.Fn do_setresuid "struct lwp *lwp" "uid_t ruid" "uid_t euid" "uid_t svuid" "u_int flags"
.Ft int
.Fn do_setresgid "struct lwp *lwp" "uid_t ruid" "uid_t euid" "uid_t svuid" "u_int flags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm do_setresuid
and
.Nm do_setresgid
functions are used to implement the various system calls that allow a
process to change its real, effective, and saved uid and gid values.
.Pp
The
.Nm do_setresuid
function sets the specified processes real user ID to
.Ar ruid ,
its effective user ID to
.Ar euid ,
and its saved user ID to
.Ar svuid .
If any of the uid arguments are \-1 then that assignment is skipped.
.Pp
If
.Fn suser
is true, then any values may be assigned, otherwise the new uid
values must match one of the existing values and the caller must have
set the relevant bit in
.Ar flags .
.Pp
The
.Ar flags
argument specifies which of the existing uid values the new value must match.
It should be set to a logical OR of ID_{R,E,S}_EQ_{R,E,S}, where ID_E_EQ_R
means that it is valid to set the effective ID to the current value of the
real ID.
.Pp
The
.Nm do_setresgid
function sets the group IDs but otherwise behaves in the same manner as
.Nm .
The processes group list is neither examined nor effected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr setregid 2 ,
.Xr setreuid 2 ,
.Xr setuid 2 ,
.Xr suser 9
.Sh CODE REFERENCES
These functions are implemented in:
.Pa sys/kern/kern_prot.c .
.Sh HISTORY
Implemented for
.Nx 2.0
to replace ad-hoc code in each system call routine and in the
various compat modules.
