.\"     $NetBSD: driver.9,v 1.24 2010/01/31 21:25:51 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Gregory McGarry.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 31, 2010
.Dt DRIVER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm driver
.Nd description of a device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/device.h
.In sys/errno.h
.Ft static int
.Fn foo_match "struct device *parent" "struct cfdata *match" "void *aux"
.Ft static void
.Fn foo_attach "struct device *parent" "struct device *self" "void *aux"
.Ft static int
.Fn foo_detach "struct device *self" "int flags"
.Ft static int
.Fn foo_activate "struct device *self" "enum devact act"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This page briefly describes the basic
.Nx
autoconfiguration interface used by device drivers.
For a detailed overview of the autoconfiguration framework see
.Xr autoconf 9 .
.Pp
Each device driver must present to the system a standard
autoconfiguration interface.
This interface is provided by the
.Em cfattach
structure.
The interface to the driver is constant and is defined
statically inside the driver.
For example, the interface to driver
.Dq foo
is defined with:
.Pp
.Bd -literal
CFATTACH_DECL(foo, 			/* driver name */
	sizeof(struct foo_softc),	/* size of instance data */
	foo_match,			/* match/probe function */
	foo_attach,			/* attach function */
	foo_detach,			/* detach function */
	foo_activate);			/* activate function */
.Ed
.Pp
For each device instance controlled by the driver, the
autoconfiguration framework allocates a block of memory to record
device-instance-specific driver variables.
The size of this memory block is specified by the second argument in the
.Em CFATTACH_DECL
macro.
The memory block is referred to as the driver's
.Em softc
structure.
The
.Em softc
structure is only accessed within the driver, so its definition is
local to the driver.
Nevertheless, the
.Em softc
structure should adopt the standard
.Nx
configuration and naming conventions.
For example, the
.Em softc
structure for driver
.Dq foo
is defined with:
.Pp
.Bd -literal
struct foo_softc {
	struct device sc_dev;		/* generic device info */
	/* device-specific state */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The autoconfiguration framework mandates that the first member of the
.Em softc
structure must be the driver-independent
.Em struct device .
Probably its most useful aspect to the driver is that it contains the
device-instance name
.Em dv_xname .
.Pp
If a driver has character device interfaces accessed from userland, the driver
must define the
.Em cdevsw
structure.
The structure is constant and is defined inside the driver.
For example, the
.Em cdevsw
structure for driver
.Dq foo
is defined with:
.Pp
.Bd -literal
const struct cdevsw foo_cdevsw {
	int (*d_open)(dev_t, int, int, struct lwp *);
	int (*d_close)(dev_t, int, int, struct lwp *);
	int (*d_read)(dev_t, struct uio *, int);
	int (*d_write)(dev_t, struct uio *, int);
	int (*d_ioctl)(dev_t, u_long, void *, int, struct lwp *);
	void (*d_stop)(struct tty *, int);
	struct tty *(*d_tty)(dev_t);
	int (*d_poll)(dev_t, int, struct lwp *);
	paddr_t (*d_mmap)(dev_t, off_t, int);
	int (*d_kqfilter)(dev_t, struct knote *);
	int d_type;
};
.Ed
.Pp
The structure variable must be named foo_cdevsw by appending the letters
.Dq _cdevsw
to the driver's base name.
This convention is mandated by the autoconfiguration framework.
.Pp
If the driver
.Dq foo
has also block device interfaces, the driver must define the
.Em bdevsw
structure.
The structure is constant and is defined inside the driver.
For example, the
.Em bdevsw
structure for driver
.Dq foo
is defined with:
.Pp
.Bd -literal
const struct bdevsw foo_bdevsw {
	int (*d_open)(dev_t, int, int, struct lwp *);
	int (*d_close)(dev_t, int, int, struct lwp *);
	void (*d_strategy)(struct buf *);
	int (*d_ioctl)(dev_t, u_long, void *, int, struct lwp *);
	int (*d_dump)(dev_t, daddr_t, void *, size_t);
	int (*d_psize)(dev_t);
	int d_type;
};
.Ed
.Pp
The structure variable must be named foo_bdevsw by appending the letters
.Dq _bdevsw
to the driver's base name.
This convention is mandated by the autoconfiguration framework.
.Pp
During system bootstrap, the autoconfiguration framework searches the
system for devices.
For each device driver, its match function is called (via its
.Em cfattach
structure) to match the driver with a device instance.
The match function is called with three arguments.
This first argument
.Fa parent
is a pointer to the driver's parent device structure.
The second argument
.Fa match
is a pointer to a data structure describing the autoconfiguration
framework's understanding of the driver.
Both the
.Fa parent
and
.Fa match
arguments are ignored by most drivers.
The third argument
.Fa aux
contains a pointer to a structure describing a potential
device-instance.
It is passed to the driver from the parent.
The match function would type-cast the
.Fa aux
argument to its appropriate attachment structure and use its contents
to determine whether it supports the device.
Depending on the device hardware, the contents of the attachment
structure may contain
.Dq locators
to locate the device instance so that the driver can probe it for its
identity.
If the probe process identifies additional device properties, it may
modify the members of the attachment structure.
For these devices, the
.Nx
convention is to
call the match routine
.Fn foo_probe
instead of
.Fn foo_match
to make this distinction clear.
Either way, the match function returns a nonzero integer indicating the
confidence of supporting this device and a value of 0 if the driver
doesn't support the device.
Generally, only a single driver exists for a device, so the match
function returns 1 for a positive match.
.Pp
The autoconfiguration framework will call the attach function
(via its
.Em cfattach
structure)
of the driver which returns the highest value from its match function.
The attach function is called with three arguments.
The attach function performs the necessary process to initialise the
device for operation.
The first argument
.Fa parent
is a pointer to the driver's parent device structure.
The second argument
.Fa self
is a pointer to the driver's device structure.
It is also a pointer to our
.Em softc
structure since the device structure is its first member.
The third argument
.Fa aux
is a pointer to the attachment structure.
The
.Fa parent
and
.Fa aux
arguments are the same as passed to the match function.
.Pp
The driver's attach function is called before system interrupts are
enabled.
If interrupts are required during initialisation, then the attach
function should make use of
.Fn config_interrupts
(see
.Xr autoconf 9 ) .
.Pp
Some devices can be removed from the system without requiring a system
reboot.
The autoconfiguration framework calls the driver's detach function
(via its
.Em cfattach
structure) during device detachment.
If the device does not support detachment, then the driver does not
have to provide a detach function.
The detach function is used to relinquish resources allocated to the
driver which are no longer needed.
The first argument
.Fa self
is a pointer to the driver's device structure.
It is the same structure as passed to the attach function.
The second argument
.Fa flags
contains detachment flags.
Valid values are
.Dv DETACH_FORCE
(force detachment; hardware gone) and
.Dv DETACH_QUIET
(do not print a notice).
.Pp
The autoconfiguration framework may call the driver's activate function
to notify the driver of a change in the resources that have been
allocated to it.
For example, an Ethernet driver has to be notified if the network stack
is being added or removed from the kernel.
The first argument to the activate function
.Fa self
is a pointer to the driver's device structure.
It is the same argument as passed to the attach function.
The second argument
.Fa act
describes the action.
Valid actions are
.Dv DVACT_ACTIVATE
(activate the device) and
.Dv DVACT_DEACTIVATE
(deactivate the device).
If the action is not supported the activate function should return
.Er EOPNOTSUPP .
The
.Dv DVACT_DEACTIVATE
call will only be made if the
.Dv DVACT_ACTIVATE
call was successful.
The activate function is called in interrupt context.
.Pp
Most drivers will want to make use of interrupt facilities.
Interrupt locators provided through the attachment structure should be
used to establish interrupts within the system.
Generally, an interrupt interface is provided by the parent.
The interface will require a handler and a driver-specific argument
to be specified.
This argument is usually a pointer to the device-instance-specific
softc structure.
When a hardware interrupt for the device occurs the handler is called
with the argument.
Interrupt handlers should return 0 for
.Dq interrupt not for me ,
1 for
.Dq I took care of it ,
or -1 for
.Do
I guess it was mine, but I wasn't expecting it
.Dc .
.Pp
For a driver to be compiled into the kernel,
.Xr config 1
must be aware of its existence.
This is done by including an entry in files.\*[Lt]bus\*[Gt] in the
directory containing the driver.
For example, the driver
.Dq foo
attaching to bus
.Dq bar
with dependency on kernel module
.Dq baz
has the entry:
.Bd -literal
device	foo: baz
attach	foo at bar
file	dev/bar/foo.c		foo
.Ed
.Pp
An entry can now be added to the machine description file:
.Bd -literal
foo*	at bar?
.Ed
.Pp
For device interfaces of a driver to be compiled into the kernel,
.Xr config 1
must be aware of its existence.
This is done by including an entry in majors.\*[Lt]arch\*[Gt].
For example, the driver
.Dq foo
with character device interfaces, a character major device number
.Dq cmaj ,
block device interfaces, a block device major number
.Dq bmaj
and dependency on kernel module
.Dq baz
has the entry:
.Bd -literal
device-major	foo	char cmaj block bmaj	baz
.Ed
.Pp
For a detailed description of the machine description file and the
.Dq device definition
language see
.Xr config 9 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr config 1 ,
.Xr autoconf 9 ,
.Xr config 9 ,
.Xr pmf 9
