.\" $NetBSD: fileassoc.9,v 1.22 2008/09/14 12:51:39 itohy Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Elad Efrat <elad@NetBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd May 15, 2007
.Dt FILEASSOC 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fileassoc
.Nd in-kernel, file-system independent, file-meta data association
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/fileassoc.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
KPI allows association of meta-data with files independent of file-system
support for such elaborate meta-data.
.Pp
When plugging a new fileassoc to the system, a developer can specify private
data to be associated with every file, as well as (potentially different)
private data to be associated with every file-system mount.
.Pp
For example, a developer might choose to associate a custom ACL with every
file, and a count of total files with ACLs with the mount.
.Ss Kernel Programming Interface
Designed with simplicity in mind, the
.Nm
KPI usually accepts four different types of parameters to the most commonly
used routines:
.Bl -tag -width "123456"
.It Ft struct mount * Ar mp
Describing a mount on which to take action.
.It Ft struct vnode * Ar vp
Describing a file on which to take action.
.It Ft fileassoc_t Ar id
Describing an id, as returned from a successful call to
.Fn fileassoc_register .
.It Ft void * Ar data
Describing a custom private data block, attached to either a file or a mount.
.El
.Pp
Before using the
.Nm
KPI it is important to keep in mind that the interface provides memory
management only for
.Nm
internal memory.
Any additional memory stored in the tables (such as private data-structures
used by custom fileassocs) should be allocated and freed by the developer.
.Pp
.Nm
provides the ability to specify a
.Dq cleanup
routine to
.Fn fileassoc_register
(see below)
to be called whenever an entry for a file or a mount is deleted.
.Ss Fileassoc Registration and Deregistration Routines
These routines allow a developer to allocate a
.Nm
slot to be used for private data.
.Bl -tag -width "123456"
.It Ft int Fn fileassoc_register "const char *name" \
"fileassoc_cleanup_cb_t cleanup_cb" "fileassoc_t *result"
Registers a new fileassoc as
.Ar name ,
and returns a
.Ft fileassoc_t
via
.Fa result
to be used as identifier in subsequent calls to the
.Nm
subsystem.
.Pp
.Fn fileassoc_register
returns zero on success.
Otherwise, an error number will be returned.
.Pp
If
.Ar cleanup_cb
is not
.Dv NULL ,
it will be called during delete/clear operations (see routines below) with
indication whether the passed data is file- or mount-specific.
.Pp
.Ar cleanup_cb
should be a function receiving a
.Ft void *
and returning
.Ft void .
See the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section for illustration.
.Pp
.It Ft int Fn fileassoc_deregister "fileassoc_t id"
Deregisters a
.Nm fileassoc
whose id is
.Ar id .
.Pp
Note that calling
.Fn fileassoc_deregister
only frees the associated slot in the
.Nm
subsystem.
It is up to the developer to take care of garbage collection.
.El
.Ss Lookup Routines
These routines allow lookup of
.Nm
mounts, files, and private data attached to them.
.Bl -tag -width "123456"
.It Ft void * Fn fileassoc_lookup "struct vnode *vp" "fileassoc_t id"
Returns the private data for the file/id combination
or
.Dv NULL
if not found.
.El
.Ss Mount-wide Routines
.Bl -tag -width "123456"
.It Ft int Fn fileassoc_table_delete "struct mount *mp"
Deletes a fileassoc table for
.Ar mp .
.Pp
.It Ft int Fn fileassoc_table_clear "struct mount *mp" "fileassoc_t id"
Clear all table entries for
.Ar fileassoc
from
.Ar mp .
.Pp
If specified, the fileassoc's
.Dq cleanup routine
will be called with a pointer to the private data-structure.
.Pp
.It Ft int Fn fileassoc_table_run "struct mount *mp" "fileassoc_t id" \
"fileassoc_cb_t cb" "void *cookie"
For each entry for
.Ar id ,
call
.Ar cb
with the entry being the first argument, and
.Ar cookie
being the second argument.
.Pp
.Ar cb
is a function returning
.Ft void
and receiving one
.Ft "void *"
parameter.
.El
.Ss File-specific Routines
.Bl -tag -width "123456"
.It Ft int Fn fileassoc_file_delete "struct vnode *vp"
Delete the fileassoc entries for
.Ar vp .
.Pp
If specified, the
.Dq cleanup routines
of all fileassoc types added will be called with a pointer to the corresponding
private data structure and indication of
.Dv FILEASSOC_CLEANUP_FILE .
.El
.Ss Fileassoc-specific Routines
.Bl -tag -width "123456"
.It Ft int Fn fileassoc_add "struct vnode *vp" "fileassoc_t id" "void *data"
Add private data in
.Ar data
for
.Ar vp ,
for the fileassoc specified by
.Ar id .
.Pp
If a table for the mount-point
.Ar vp
is on doesn't exist, one will be created automatically.
.Nm
manages internally the optimal table sizes as tables are modified.
.It Ft int Fn fileassoc_clear "struct vnode *vp" "fileassoc_t id"
Clear the private data for
.Ar vp ,
for the fileassoc specified by
.Ar id .
.Pp
If specified, the fileassoc's
.Dq cleanup routine
will be called with a pointer to the private data-structure and indication of
.Dv FILEASSOC_CLEANUP_FILE .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following code examples should give you a clue on using
.Nm
for your purposes.
.Pp
First, we'll begin with registering a new id.
We need to do that to save a slot for private data storage with each mount
and/or file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
fileassoc_t myhook_id;
int error;

error = fileassoc_register("my_hook", myhook_cleanup, \*[Am]myhook_id);
if (error != 0)
	...handle error...
.Ed
.Pp
In the above example we pass a
.Fn myhook_cleanup
routine.
It could look something like this:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
void
myhook_cleanup(void *data)
{

	printf("Myhook: Removing entry for file.\en");
	...handle file entry removal...
	free(data, M_TEMP);
}
.Ed
.Pp
Another useful thing would be to add our private data to a file.
For example, let's assume we keep a custom ACL with each file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
int
myhook_acl_add(struct vnode *vp, struct myhook_acl *acl)
{
	int error;

	error = fileassoc_add(vp, myhook_id, acl);
	if (error) {
		printf("Myhook: Could not add ACL.\en");
		...handle error...
	}

	printf("Myhook: Added ACL.\en");

	return (0);
}
.Ed
.Pp
Adding an entry will override any entry that previously exists.
.Pp
Whatever your plug is, eventually you'll want to access the private data you
store with each file.
To do that you can use the following:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
int
myhook_acl_access(struct vnode *vp, int access_flags)
{
	struct myhook_acl *acl;

	acl = fileassoc_lookup(vp, myhook_id);
	if (acl == NULL)
		return (0);

	error = myhook_acl_eval(acl, access_flags);
	if (error) {
		printf("Myhook: Denying access based on ACL decision.\en");
		return (error);
	}

	return (0);
}
.Ed
.Pp
And, in some cases, it may be desired to remove private data associated with
an file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
int error;

error = fileassoc_clear(vp, myhook_id);
if (error) {
	printf("Myhook: Error occurred during fileassoc removal.\en");
	...handle error...
}
.Ed
.Pp
As mentioned previously, the call to
.Fn fileassoc_clear
will result in a call to the
.Dq cleanup routine
specified in the initial call to
.Fn fileassoc_register .
.Pp
The above should be enough to get you started.
.Pp
For example usage of
.Nm ,
see the Veriexec code.
.Sh CODE REFERENCES
.Pa src/sys/kern/kern_fileassoc.c
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
KPI first appeared in
.Nx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Elad Efrat Aq elad@NetBSD.org
.An Brett Lymn Aq blymn@NetBSD.org
