.\"	$NetBSD: flash.9,v 1.3.10.1 2014/08/20 00:02:37 tls Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Department of Software Engineering,
.\"		      University of Szeged, Hungary
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Adam Hoka <ahoka@NetBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by the Department of Software Engineering, University of Szeged, Hungary
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 31, 2011
.Dt FLASH 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm flash
.Nd subsystem for flash-like memory devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In dev/flash/flash.h
.Ft device_t
.Fn flash_attach_mi "const struct flash_interface *fl" "device_t dev"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Flash-like devices can register themselves to the
.Nm
layer with the
.Fa flash_hw_if
structure.
This structure has function pointers and other fields.
.Pp
The attachment can be done by calling
.Fn flash_attach_mi
with this structure and the device's
.Vt device_t
as an argument.
Return value is the flash layer device.
The
.Fa flash_interface
structure is shown below.
.Bd -literal
struct flash_interface {
	int (*erase) (device_t, struct flash_erase_instruction *);
	int (*read) (device_t, off_t, size_t, size_t *, uint8_t *);
	int (*write) (device_t, off_t, size_t, size_t *, const uint8_t *);
	int (*block_markbad)(device_t, uint64_t);
	int (*block_isbad)(device_t, uint64_t);
	int (*sync) (device_t);

	int (*submit)(device_t, struct buf *);

	/* storage for partition info */
	struct flash_partition partition;

	/* total size of mtd */
	flash_addr_t size;
	uint32_t page_size;
	uint32_t erasesize;
	uint32_t writesize;
	uint32_t minor;
	uint8_t	type;
};
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr flash 4 ,
.Xr nand 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Adam Hoka Aq Mt ahoka@NetBSD.org
