.\" $NetBSD: interrupt_distribute.9,v 1.2 2016/07/06 09:20:42 abhinav Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Internet Initiative Japan Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 17, 2015
.Dt INTERRUPT_DISTRIBUTE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm interrupt_distribute
.Nd assign an interrupt to a CPU
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/interrupt.h
.Ft int
.Fn interrupt_distribute "void *ich" "const kcpuset_t *newset" \
"kcpuset_t *oldset"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
function exists to assign an interrupt to a CPU.
.Pp
If a driver (or the other kernel component) wishes to assign an
interrupt to a CPU, it should pass an interrupt handler such as
the return value of
.Fn pci_intr_establish
as
.Fa ich
argument, and it should pass the kcpuset to which it should be
assigned as
.Fa newset .
To get the previous value, pass a
.Pf non- Dv NULL
value to
.Ft oldset .
