.\"     $NetBSD: KASSERT.9,v 1.13 2011/09/27 00:36:51 jym Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Igor Sobrado
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd September 27, 2011
.Dt KASSERT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm KASSERT ,
.Nm KASSERTMSG ,
.Nm KDASSERT ,
.Nm KDASSERTMSG
.Nd kernel expression verification macros
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ft void
.Fn KASSERT expression
.Ft void
.Fn KASSERTMSG expression format ...
.Ft void
.Fn KDASSERT expression
.Ft void
.Fn KDASSERTMSG expression format ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These machine independent assertion-checking macros cause a kernel
.Xr panic 9
if the given
.Ar expression
evaluates to false.
Two compile-time
.Xr options 4
define the behavior of the checks.
.Bl -enum -offset 2n
.It
The
.Fn KASSERT
and
.Fn KASSERTMSG
tests are included only in kernels compiled with the
.Dv DIAGNOSTIC
configuration option.
In a kernel that does not have this configuration option,
the macros are defined to be no-ops.
.It
The
.Fn KDASSERT
and
.Fn KDASSERTMSG
tests are included only in kernels compiled with the
.Dv DEBUG
configuration option.
The
.Fn KDASSERT
and
.Fn KASSERT
macros are identical except for the controlling option
.Pf ( Dv DEBUG
vs
.Dv DIAGNOSTIC ) .
Basically,
.Fn KASSERT
should be used for light-weight checks and
.Fn KDASSERT
should be used for heavier ones.
.El
.Pp
Callers should not rely on the side effects of
.Ar expression
because, depending on the kernel compile options mentioned above,
.Ar expression
might not be evaluated at all.
.Pp
The panic message will display the style of assertion (debugging
vs. diagnostic), the expression that failed and the filename, and line
number the failure happened on.
The
.Fn KASSERTMSG
and
.Fn KDASSERTMSG
macros append
to the
.Xr panic 9
format string the message specified by
.Fa format
and its subsequent arguments, similar to
.Xr printf 9
functions.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr config 1 ,
.Xr options 4 ,
.Xr CTASSERT 9 ,
.Xr panic 9 ,
.Xr printf 9
.Sh AUTHORS
These macros were written by
.An Chris G. Demetriou
.Aq cgd@netbsd.org .
