.\" $NetBSD: kcpuset.9,v 1.3.2.2 2013/02/25 00:28:15 tls Exp $ */
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Jukka Ruohonen <jruohonen.iki.fi>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd September 16, 2012
.Dt KCPUSET 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm kcpuset ,
.Nm kcpuset_create ,
.Nm kcpuset_destroy ,
.Nm kcpuset_copy ,
.Nm kcpuset_use ,
.Nm kcpuset_unuse ,
.Nm kcpuset_copyin ,
.Nm kcpuset_copyout ,
.Nm kcpuset_zero ,
.Nm kcpuset_fill ,
.Nm kcpuset_set ,
.Nm kcpuset_clear ,
.Nm kcpuset_isset ,
.Nm kcpuset_isotherset ,
.Nm kcpuset_iszero ,
.Nm kcpuset_match ,
.Nm kcpuset_merge ,
.Nm kcpuset_countset ,
.Nm kcpuset_atomic_set ,
.Nm kcpuset_atomic_clear
.Nm kcpuset_export_32
.Nd dynamic kernel CPU sets
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/kcpuset.h
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_create "kcpuset_t **retkcp" "bool zero"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_destroy "kcpuset_t *kcp"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_copy "kcpuset_t *dkcp" "kcpuset_t *skcp"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_use "kcpuset_t *kcp"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_unuse "kcpuset_t *kcp" "kcpuset_t **lst"
.Ft int
.Fn kcpuset_copyin "const cpuset_t *ucp" "kcpuset_t *kcp" "size_t len"
.Ft int
.Fn kcpuset_copyout "kcpuset_t *kcp" "cpuset_t *ucp" "size_t len"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_zero "kcpuset_t *kcp"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_fill "kcpuset_t *kcp"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_set "kcpuset_t *kcp" "cpuid_t cpu"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_clear "kcpuset_t *kcp" "cpuid_t cpu"
.Ft bool
.Fn kcpuset_isset "kcpuset_t * kcp" "cpuid_t cpu"
.Ft bool
.Fn kcpuset_isotherset "kcpuset_t * kcp" "cpuid_t cpu"
.Ft bool
.Fn kcpuset_iszero "kcpuset_t *kcp"
.Ft bool
.Fn kcpuset_match "const kcpuset_t *kcp1" "const kcpuset_t *kcp2"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_merge "kcpuset_t *kcp1" "kcpuset_t *kcp2"
.Ft int
.Fn kcpuset_countset "kcpuset_t *kcp1"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_atomic_set "kcpuset_t *kcp" "cpuid_t cpu"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_atomic_clear "kcpuset_t *kcp" "cpuid_t cpu"
.Ft void
.Fn kcpuset_export_u32 "const kcpuset_t *kcp" "uint32_t *bitfield" "size_t len"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The machine-independent
.Nm
subsystem provides support for dynamic processor sets.
Conceptually
.Nm
can be understood to be the kernel equivalent of the user space
.Xr cpuset 3
interface.
.Sh FUNCTIONS
.Bl -tag -width compact
.It Fn kcpuset_create "retkcp" "zero"
The
.Fn kcpuset_create
function creates a dynamic
.Tn CPU
set and stores the result to
.Fa retkcp .
If the boolean
.Fa zero
is not false, the allocated set is also initialized to zero.
.It Fn kcpuset_destroy "kcp"
Destroys the
.Tn CPU
set
.Fa kcp
and schedules any linked CPU sets for deferred destruction.
.It Fn kcpuset_copy "dkcp" "skcp"
Copies the
.Tn CPU
set pointed by
.Fa skcp
to
.Fa dkcp .
.It Fn kcpuset_use "kcp"
Marks
.Fa kcp
as being in use by increasing the reference count of the object.
Note that initially
.Fn kcpuset_create
sets the reference count to 1.
.It Fn kcpuset_unuse "kcp" "lst"
Decreases the internal reference count of
.Fa kcp ,
and on the last reference (when the count reaches zero), destroys
.Fa kcp .
If
.Fa lst
is not
.Dv NULL ,
then instead of destroying,
.Fa kcp
will be added to the
.Fa lst
list for a deferred destruction.
.It Fn kcpuset_copyin "ucp" "kcp" "len"
Copies the
.Fa len
bytes long user-space
.Tn CPU
set
.Fa ucp
to the kernel
.Tn CPU
set
.Fa kcp .
.It Fn kcpuset_copyout "kcp" "ucp" "len"
Copies the kernel
.Tn CPU
set
.Fa kcp
to the user-space
.Tn CPU
set
.Fa ucp .
.It Fn kcpuset_zero "kcp"
Clears the set
.Fa kcp .
.It Fn kcpuset_fill "kcp"
Fills the whole set
.Fa kcp
with ones.
.It Fn kcpuset_set "kcp" "cpu"
Adds
.Fa cpu
to the set
.Fa kcp .
.It Fn kcpuset_clear "kcp" "cpu"
Removes
.Fa cpu
from the set
.Fa kcp .
.It Fn kcpuset_isset "kcp" "cpu"
Returns true if
.Fa cpu
is part of the
.Tn CPU
set
.Fa kcp .
.It Fn kcpuset_isotherset "kcp" "cpu"
Returns true if there any CPUs
other than
.Fa cpu
in the
.Tn CPU
set
.Fa kcp .
.It Fn kcpuset_iszero "kcp"
Returns true if the set
.Fa kcp
is empty.
.It Fn kcpuset_match "kcp1" "kcp2"
Compares the sets
.Fa kcp1
and
.Fa kcp2 ,
returning true if these are identical.
.It Fn kcpuset_merge "kcp1" "kcp2"
Merges the set
.Fa kcp2
to the set
.Fa kcp1 .
.It Fn kcpuset_countset "kcp"
Counts how many CPUs are in the set
.Fa kcp .
.It Fn kcpuset_atomic_set "kcp" "cpu"
The
.Fn kcpuset_atomic_set
function operates as
.Fn kcpuset_set ,
but the operation is atomic; see
.Xr atomic_ops 3
for more details.
.It Fn kcpuset_atomic_clear "kcp" "cpu"
Removes
.Fa cpu
from the
.Tn CPU
set
.Fa kcp
atomically.
.It Fn kcpuset_export_u32 "kcp" "bitfield" "len"
Exports the CPU set
.Fa kcp
into a format of 32-bit integer array,
specified by
.Fa bitfield
and length in bytes by
.Fa len .
An integers is in the host byte-order and represents a bit field.
The first bit at index zero represents CPU number 0, and so on.
.El
.Sh CODE REFERENCES
The
.Nm
subsystem is implemented within
.Pa sys/kern/subr_kcpuset.c .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cpuset 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
subsystem first appeared in
.Nx 6.0 .
