.\"	$NetBSD: kmem_free.9,v 1.4.4.1 2008/01/09 01:39:20 matt Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c)2006 YAMAMOTO Takashi,
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Dd January 4, 2008
.Dt KMEM_FREE 9
.Os
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh NAME
.Nm kmem_free
.Nd free kernel wired memory
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/kmem.h
.\" - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
.Ft void
.Fn kmem_free \
"void *p" "size_t size"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn kmem_free
frees kernel wired memory allocated by
.Fn kmem_alloc
or
.Fn kmem_zalloc
so that it can be used for other purposes.
It takes the following arguments.
.Bl -tag -width kmflags
.It Fa p
The pointer to the memory being freed.
It must be the one returned by
.Fn kmem_alloc
or
.Fn kmem_zalloc .
.It Fa size
The size of the memory being freed, in bytes.
It must be the same as the
.Fa size
argument used for
.Fn kmem_alloc
or
.Fn kmem_zalloc
when the memory was allocated.
.El
.Pp
Freeing
.Dv NULL
is illegal.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 9 ,
.Xr kmem_alloc 9 ,
.Xr kmem_zalloc 9 ,
.Xr memoryallocators 9
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh CAVEATS
.Fn kmem_free
can not be used from interrupt context.
