.\"	$NetBSD: rndsink.9,v 1.2 2013/06/24 04:21:20 riastradh Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This documentation is derived from text contributed to The NetBSD
.\" Foundation by Taylor R. Campbell.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 10, 2013
.Dt RNDSINK 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rndsink ,
.Nm rndsink_create ,
.Nm rndsink_destroy ,
.Nm rndsink_request ,
.Nm rndsink_schedule ,
.Nd functions to asynchronously request entropy from the system entropy pool
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/rndsink.h
.Ft struct rndsink *
.Fn rndsink_create "size_t bytes" "void (*callback)(void *, const void *, size_t)" "void *arg"
.Ft void
.Fn rndsink_destroy "struct rndsink *rndsink"
.Ft bool
.Fn rndsink_request "struct rndsink *rndsink" "void *buffer" "size_t bytes"
.Ft void
.Fn rndsink_schedule "struct rndsink *rndsink"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
functions support asynchronous requests for entropy from the system
entropy pool.
Users must call
.Fn rndsink_create
to create an rndsink which they may then pass to
.Fn rndsink_request
to request data from the system entropy pool.
If full entropy is not available, the system will call a callback when
entropy is next available.
Users can schedule a callback without requesting data now using
.Fn rndsink_schedule .
When users no longer need an rndsink, they must pass it to
.Fn rndsink_destroy .
.Pp
This API provides direct access to the system entropy pool.
Most users should use the
.Xr cprng 9
API instead, which interposes a cryptographic pseudorandom number
generator between the user and the entropy pool.
.Sh FUNCTIONS
.Bl -tag -width abcd
.It Fn rndsink_create bytes callback arg
Create an rndsink for requests of
.Fa bytes
bytes of entropy, which must be no more than
.Dv RNDSINK_MAX_BYTES .
When requested and enough entropy is available, the system will call
.Fa callback
with three arguments:
.Bl -item -offset indent
.It
.Fa arg ,
an arbitrary user-supplied pointer;
.It
a pointer to a buffer containing the bytes of entropy; and
.It
the number of bytes in the buffer, which will always be
.Fa bytes .
.El
.Pp
The callback will be called in soft interrupt context.
.Pp
.Fn rndsink_create
may sleep to allocate memory.
.It Fn rndsink_destroy rndsink
Destroy an rndsink.
.Fn rndsink_destroy
may sleep to wait for pending callbacks to complete and to deallocate
memory.
.It Fn rndsink_request rndsink buffer bytes
Store
.Fa bytes
bytes derived from the system entropy pool in
.Fa buffer .
If the bytes have full entropy, return true.
Otherwise, schedule a callback as if with
.Fn rndsink_schedule
and return false.
In either case,
.Fn rndsink_request
will store data in
.Fa buffer .
The argument
.Fa bytes
must be the same as the argument to
.Fn rndsink_create
that was used to create
.Fa rndsink .
May be called at
.Dv IPL_VM
or lower.
The caller should use
.Xr explicit_memset 3
to clear
.Fa buffer
once it has used the data stored there.
.It Fn rndsink_schedule rndsink
Schedule a callback when the system entropy pool has enough entropy.
If a callback is already scheduled, it remains scheduled.
May be called at
.Dv IPL_VM
or lower.
.El
.Sh CODE REFERENCES
The rndsink API is implemented in
.Pa sys/kern/kern_rndsink.c
and
.Pa sys/sys/rndsink.h .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr explicit_memset 3 ,
.Xr cprng 9 ,
.Xr rnd 9
.Sh HISTORY
The rndsink API first appeared in
.Nx 7.0 .
