.\" $NetBSD: secmodel_suser.9,v 1.4 2009/10/03 07:37:01 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2009 Elad Efrat <elad@NetBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 2, 2009
.Dt SECMODEL_SUSER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm secmodel_suser
.Nd super-user security model
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
implements the traditional
.Em super-user
(root) as the user with effective user-id 0.
The
.Em super-user
is the host administrator, considered to have higher privileges than other
users.
.Pp
The following
.Xr sysctl 3
variables are exported:
.Bl -tag -width compact
.It security.models.suser.curtain
If non-zero, will filter returned objects according to the user-id
requesting information about them, preventing from users any access to
objects they don't own.
.Pp
At the moment, it affects
.Xr ps 1 ,
.Xr netstat 1
(for
.Dv PF_INET ,
.Dv PF_INET6 ,
and
.Dv PF_UNIX
PCBs), and
.Xr w 1 .
.It security.models.suser.usermount
Allow non-superuser mounts.
.Pp
If non-zero, file-systems are allowed to be mounted by an ordinary user who
owns the point
.Ar node
and has at least read access to the
.Ar special
device
.Xr mount 8
arguments.
Finally, the flags
.Cm nosuid
and
.Cm nodev
must be given for non-superuser mounts.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kauth 9 ,
.Xr secmodel 9 ,
.Xr secmodel_bsd44 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Elad Efrat Aq elad@NetBSD.org
