.\"	$NetBSD: setrunqueue.9,v 1.8 2005/12/20 19:53:15 rpaulo Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001, 2002 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by the NetBSD
.\"        Foundation, Inc. and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of The NetBSD Foundation nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 20, 2005
.Dt SETRUNQUEUE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm setrunqueue ,
.Nm remrunqueue ,
.Nm nextrunqueue
.Nd manipulate system run queue
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/proc.h
.In sys/sched.h
.Ft void
.Fn setrunqueue "struct lwp *l"
.Ft void
.Fn remrunqueue "struct lwp *l"
.Ft struct lwp *
.Fn nextrunqueue "void"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn setrunqueue ,
.Fn remrunqueue ,
and
.Fn nextrunqueue
functions manipulate the system queue of runnable processes.
The system scheduler uses this queue to find the highest-priority process
when a process switch occurs.
These functions are generally machine-dependent implementations in order
to permit efficient implementation of priority-based process selection.
.Pp
.Bf -symbolic
Currently, these functions are scheduler specific and correspond to
the default
.Dq time-sharing
scheduler in
.Nx .
Their implementation is likely to change in the future to cater for
different schedulers.
.Ef
.Pp
The priority queue consists of an array
.Va sched_qs[NQS]
of queue header structures each of which identifies a list of runnable
processes of equal priority.
Lower indices in
.Va sched_qs
indicate higher priority.
A single word
.Va sched_whichqs
containing a bit mask identifying non-empty queues assists in
selecting a process quickly.
The running process is on no queue, other processes are on a queue related
to p->p_priority, divided by 4 actually to shrink the 0-127 range of
priorities into the 32 available queues.
.Pp
The
.Fn setrunqueue
function places the given process on the system run queue.
It is an error to call
.Fn setrunqueue
with a process that is not runnable or that is already on the system
run queue or sleep queue.
.Pp
The
.Fn remrunqueue
function removes the given process from the system run queue.
It is an error to call
.Fn remrunqueue
with a process that is not on the system run queue.
.Pp
The
.Fn nextrunqueue
function will make a choice amongst the processes which are ready to
run from the priority run queue.
.Fn nextrunqueue
will remove the first process from the list on the queue with the
highest priority a return it.
.Pp
These functions must be called with the scheduler lock held
.Pq see Xr SCHED_LOCK 9
and at the
.Xr splsched 9
interrupt protection level,
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr SCHED_LOCK 9 ,
.Xr scheduler 9 ,
.Xr splsched 9
