.\"	$NetBSD: skpc.9,v 1.2 2011/11/01 23:17:59 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c)2011 YAMAMOTO Takashi,
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Dd November 1, 2011
.Dt SKPC 9
.Os
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh NAME
.Nm skpc
.Nd skip a character in a byte string
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In lib/libkern/libkern.h
.\" - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
.Ft int
.Fn skpc \
"u_char mask" "size_t size" "u_char *cp"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn skpc
function scans the byte string
.Fa cp ,
whose length is
.Fa size ,
until it finds the first character which isn't equal to
.Fa mask
or the string is exhausted.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn skpc
function returns the number of characters skipped.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn skpc
function emulates a VAX instruction with the same name.
