.\"	$NetBSD: ts2timo.9,v 1.3 2013/05/24 14:41:32 njoly Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Christos Zoulas
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd May 22, 2013
.Dt TS2TIMO 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ts2timo
.Nd convert time interval to tick count
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/timevar.h
.Ft int
.Fn ts2timo "clock_id clock_id" "int flags" "struct timespec *ts" "int *timo" "struct timespec *start"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn ts2timo
function converts the time interval specified in
.Fa ts
into the integral number of system ticks that would elapse (including the
current tick) and places the result in
.Fa timo .
The interval type is specified in the
.Fa flags
argument and can be either
.Dv TIMER_ABSTIME
or
.Dv TIMER_RELTIME .
If the interval is specified as an absolute time, then the
.Fa clock_id
clock is used to convert it to a relative time.
If the
.Fa start
argument is not
.Dv NULL ,
then current time for the
.Fa clock_id
clock is placed in that argument.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
On success
.Fn ts2timo
returns
.Dv 0 .
On failure it returns
.Er ETIMEDOUT
if  interval computed was
.Dv 0
or negative, and
.Er EINVAL
if
.Fa ts->tv_usec
field in the computed interval is out of range, or the
.Fa clock_id
argument is invalid.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr clock_gettime 2 ,
.Xr clock_nanosleep 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
function first appeared in
.Nx 7.0 .
