.\"	$NetBSD: uiomove.9,v 1.18 2017/07/03 21:28:48 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 26, 2010
.Dt UIOMOVE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uiomove
.Nd move data described by a struct uio
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/systm.h
.Ft int
.Fn uiomove "void *buf" "size_t n" "struct uio *uio"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn uiomove
function copies up to
.Fa n
bytes between the kernel-space address pointed
to by
.Fa buf
and the addresses described by
.Fa uio ,
which may be in user-space or kernel-space.
.Pp
The
.Fa uio
argument is a pointer to a
.Va struct uio
as defined by
.In sys/uio.h :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct uio {
	struct	iovec *uio_iov;
	int	uio_iovcnt;
	off_t	uio_offset;
	size_t	uio_resid;
	enum	uio_rw uio_rw;
	struct	vmspace *uio_vmspace;
};
.Ed
.Pp
A
.Va struct uio
typically describes data in motion.
Several of the fields described below reflect that expectation.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "uio_vmspace "
.It Va uio_iov
Pointer to array of
.Tn I/O
vectors to be processed.
The
.Va struct iovec
is defined to be:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct iovec {
	void	*iov_base;
	size_t	 iov_len;
};
.Ed
.Pp
The members in the
.Va struct iovec
should only be initialized.
These are:
.Bl -tag -width "*iov_base " -offset indent
.It Va iov_base
The address for a range of memory to or from which data is transferred.
.It Va iov_len
The number of bytes of data to be transferred to
or from the range of memory starting at
.Va iov_base .
.El
.It Va uio_iovcnt
The number of
.Tn I/O
vectors in the
.Va uio_iov
array.
.It Va uio_offset
An offset into the corresponding object.
.It Va uio_resid
The amount of space described by the structure; notionally, the amount
of data remaining to be transferred.
.It Va uio_rw
A flag indicating whether data should be read into the space
(UIO_READ) or written from the space (UIO_WRITE).
.It Va uio_vmspace
A pointer to the address space which is being transferred to or from.
.El
.Pp
The value of
.Va uio->uio_rw
controls whether
.Fn uiomove
copies data from
.Fa buf
to
.Fa uio
or vice versa.
.Pp
The lesser of
.Fa n
or
.Va uio->uio_resid
bytes are copied.
.Pp
.Fn uiomove
changes fields of the structure pointed to by
.Fa uio ,
such that
.Va uio->uio_resid
is decremented by the amount of data moved,
.Va uio->uio_offset
is incremented by the same amount, and the array of iovecs is adjusted
to point that much farther into the region described.
This allows multiple calls to
.Fn uiomove
to easily be used to fill or drain the region of data.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion,
.Fn uiomove
returns 0.
If a bad address is encountered,
.Er EFAULT
is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr copy 9 ,
.Xr fetch 9 ,
.Xr store 9
