.\"	$NetBSD: vmem_create.9,v 1.4 2008/09/24 21:11:25 pooka Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c)2006 YAMAMOTO Takashi,
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Dd September 24, 2008
.Dt VMEM_CREATE 9
.Os
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh NAME
.Nm vmem_create
.Nd create a vmem arena
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/vmem.h
.\" - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
.Ft vmem_t *
.Fn vmem_create \
"const char *name" "vmem_addr_t base" "vmem_size_t size" "vmem_size_t quantum" \
"vmem_addr_t (*allocfn)(vmem_t *, vmem_size_t, vmem_size_t *, vm_flag_t)" \
"void (*freefn)(vmem_t *, vmem_addr_t, vmem_size_t)" \
"vmem_t *source" "vmem_size_t qcache_max" "vm_flag_t flags" "int ipl"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn vmem_create
creates a new vmem arena.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width qcache_max
.It Fa name
The string to describe the vmem.
.It Fa base
The start address of the initial span.
It can be
.Dv VMEM_ADDR_NULL
if no initial span is required.
.It Fa size
The size of the initial span.
.It Fa quantum
The smallest unit of allocation.
.It Fa allocfn
The callback function used to import spans from the backend arena.
.It Fa freefn
The callback function used to free spans to the backend arena.
.It Fa source
The backend arena.
.It Fa qcache_max
The largest size of allocations which can be served by quantum cache.
It is merely a hint and can be ignored.
.It Fa flags
Either of:
.Bl -tag -width VM_NOSLEEP
.It Dv VM_SLEEP
Can sleep until enough resources are available.
.It Dv VM_NOSLEEP
Don't sleep.
Immediately return
.Dv NULL
if there are not enough resources available.
.El
.It Fa ipl
Interrupt level to be blocked for allocating from vmem.
.El
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn vmem_create
return a pointer to the newly allocated vmem_t.
Otherwise, it returns
.Dv NULL .
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 9 ,
.Xr vmem 9
